Oh, I like you.
It looks pretty bad. It's t
Yes.
Yes. Hello.
Why things get round.
Thank you.
Thank. All right, welcome.
Thank you First Levi, doc, Braley,
officials, uh, and everybody else.
Very good to have you here.
Have you here for six hours,
although we won't be doing it on one big block.
There will be some breaks. So, um, look, I'll,
I'll open it up to to you for some introductory remarks.
And then, um, we will then move on
with our structured agenda, which was firstly
around organizational performance, been
around key service areas, performance and challenges,
and then health infrastructure.
Thank you, professor Levy. Dr. Braley. Thank
You. Thank you.
Um, chair your committee.
Uh, we'll just make some introductory comments.
I'll just start off briefly
and then Gram will take over from me
and we'll just make some introductions.
I've got, um, Dr.
Andrew Connolly, our vice chair with me,
Dale Brand Chief Executive,
and Bevin Mackenzie, our Chief financial officer.
And Dale and Bevin have got a number of our colleagues,
management colleagues with us,
and they've got the areas of, uh, that they lead
and they've got special expertise
and we'll involve them in, uh, dealing
with the questions as well.
Uh, so just, uh, for a sense of context, uh,
health New Zealand is a significant
and extensive organization.
It's the largest organization in New Zealand
that has a total expenditure of 29 billion
and a workforce of over 100,000.
We deliver integrated services right across the country.
This is treatment, uh, diagnostic care
and, um, Preventive.
Uh, we work across 87 campuses,
1,273 buildings and 11,092 beds.
We also fund primary
and community sector to the value of 10.1 billion.
That's across 9,000 providers
and 15,700 contracts.
Um, and our services, uh, uh, cover the whole spectrum
of integrated care.
Um, in the global context.
Uh, our, um, health service still performs, uh,
quite well comparatively.
We've got a life expectancy that's currently at 82 years.
Uh, we rank 16 in the world for life expectancy.
Um, we still have disparity in life expectancy of Maori,
although, uh, pleasing in recent years.
The gap has reduced from eight to six years since 2002.
Uh, obviously in all of this luck in most of the areas,
more work is required.
Uh, thank you Stan. Uh,
just a little bit about our context.
Uh, health New Zealand has been going
through a prolonged period of change
for the last three years.
We're now starting to enter a more stable period, uh,
including with our senior appointments now, uh, in place.
Uh, I just wanted to acknowledge it has been a difficult,
uh, industrial climate over the last year,
and we're also operating in an environment
of significant increase in demand for services.
And, for example, our emergency departments last year saw
4% uplift.
Uh, clinical quality
and safety, obviously a very significant
priority for Health New Zealand.
We have done longitudinal reviews looking at the last 10
years around quality
and safety, where we see a mixed picture, a number
of indicators improving, some stable,
but some we clearly have some more work to do.
Just in terms of performance.
We have seen some significant movement in the last year on
the financial, uh, front.
We have managed to come in within budget
with a small surplus to our budget position
for the first time since our inception.
We've also seen movement on our health targets
with all five health targets improving by the end of Q4.
Uh, so that is pleasing. The elective boost was achieved.
Uh, we've also, after reaching historic highs in January,
February, started to see the
reduction in our overall waiting list,
which is very pleasing, meaning that New Zealanders, uh,
having to wait less length of time for access to services,
uh, on productivity
and overall, uh, how our services are performing.
We've also seen a change in productivity in the last year.
The first change that we've seen in a number of years, uh,
where we look at our case rated discharges.
Uh, so that, again,
also appeasing significant change in primary
and community care going on, uh, with enrollments, uh,
into P hos now over 5,050,000 people added, uh,
to those enrollments, GP
and primary care services, the very foundation
of our healthcare system, more than 21 million visits, uh,
in the last financial year.
At the same time, we acknowledge that access
to some services has been difficult,
and so trying to improve access, improve the amount
of urgent care available as well.
Uh, just another thing to mention in the primary
and community care space, which is pleasing,
is obviously if we can move to prevention
and a focus on screening,
which identifies disease at a very early stage, uh,
we get better health outcomes.
And we have seen some very significant improvements in our
screening programs.
Cervical, uh, cancer screening, for example,
hit 74%, which is a very big uplift.
Our bowel cancer screening is sitting around 57 to 58%.
And also our breast, uh, cancer screening programs, uh,
doing well, uh, close to the 70% target
on the Maori health front.
And we have sala here,
and I'm sure we'll get questions around Maori Health.
As Leicester has said, we have seen a reduction in the life
expectancy gap.
Uh, we do monitor health target performance specifically
for Maori, and another, a number of other metrics.
And we have seen, uh, for example, that we still have a lot
of work to do, uh, with things like immunization for Maori,
where the Maori rate is 68% compared
to the total population rate of 82%.
Finally, on workforce,
we have seen an increase in our healthcare workforce, uh,
with a lift over the last two years of
around 6% in our medical staffing, 12% in our nursing
and allied health, and 7% in mid midwifery
and support services.
Our vacancy rates
and our turnover rates are now at historic lows.
Uh, and as we know, uh, there's always more demand
for healthcare services.
So we are continuing to look at ways to invest in workforce,
and we recently announced, uh, the intake
of nursing graduates 1800 over the, uh,
coming months into Health New Zealand.
Um, and with that, um, hand over to you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Uh, we have a question here from Dr. Campbell.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much.
Um, we saw with the, the merger
of the district health boards
with an extra layer bureaucracy on top
that the financial systems weren't,
weren't well thought through.
And we have heard that the finances were operated
through a single Excel spreadsheet.
Can you give us an update, uh,
on the financial management improvements
that Health New Zealand has undertaken?
Point of order, Point of order. Dr. Verl,
Uh, I believe my colleague is misquoting the Deloitte
Report, um,
into the financial systems at Health New Zealand.
And perhaps you'd like to more truthfully characterize I
Was, well, it's been point of order.
I wasn't actually referring to the Deloitte report,
so I did not mention it, um, in my question.
Well, then where is your evidence for that statement?
It, it was in the media. I'll let the question stand
and if it's untrue, then Health New Zealand can say.
So
We have seen a very significant change in our financial
performance as an organization,
as you'll see in the annual report result,
where we had come in, uh, on budget this year
with a very small surplus the preceding
two years, we did not.
We did have a Deloitte review,
which members will be well aware of, uh,
and we have worked very hard to implement the findings
of the Deloitte review, including such things as moving to,
uh, system across all of our districts.
We also move to more closely match revenue to expenditure,
to work with our districts to build our budgets so
that people are very aware of, uh, the budgets
that they have allocated to them
and around areas of significant costs.
Uh, we have, uh, had much greater oversight of those costs
as the system has continued to develop.
I would just say in the context, this was, uh,
the biggest merger in New Zealand, uh, history, uh,
with a number of legacy systems, including financial systems
that were brought together.
Uh, and we are still working to continue to improve some
of this, but we have our CFO here.
I'm not sure if you'd like to add anything else, Ben.
It's a very good summary, Dale.
Um, as you say, the FM system went live in June 24.
That was a number of years work,
so we now have single integrated financial system,
which consolidates all of our, uh, results.
Um, I would notice, well that the way
that we manage performance has improved.
So we have integrated operating performance reviews with all
of our regions and our major delivery functions every month.
Those then cascade through, uh, the organization.
Uh, we have daily cash flow forecasting, which was also one
of the issues that we saw, uh, pre previously.
Uh, we've improved
and got greater clarity around the delegations
and, uh, we're continuing to improve that, uh, as well.
Um, and the final point I would mention is that the, um,
putting in place the teams
and having stability of the people in the organization,
we've made a number of, uh, permanent appointments both
to Dale's executive team.
Uh, we have regional chief financial officers in all of the,
uh, regions that's been in place since, uh, July.
We do have more work to do on that front,
but having consistent capable people working through
a single source of truth systems is obviously very important
to good financial report
T Supple metric.
Um, what progress has been made
with activity based costings and budgets?
Uh, we have improved with our 25 26, uh, budget.
So we had a nationally coordinated,
uh, activity, uh, planning.
Uh, I would note that, um, organizations of the scale
of Health New Zealand, that normally takes a number of years
to get to, uh, detailed local activity planning.
Um, so I would say that improvement was made
through the 25 26, uh, budget.
We will continue to improve that,
in particular in the coming year through, um, even greater,
uh, involvement from frontline in
defining those activity plans.
We recognize that that is not yet
as detailed as it should be.
Uh, we expect that that would probably be over the next two
or three years that we would see that get to the point,
um, that it should be
Supplementary Supplementary. Dr. Barrow,
Can you please, um, elaborate on when the work
to implement FPM began?
That was a project over a number of years.
I dunno when that was started,
but it was certainly a multi-year, uh,
project significant, uh, investment.
Well, perhaps I could help you.
It began under the last government.
That's correct, isn't it?
Yes. So the f him, uh, system that you cite
as a solution to the issues raised in the Deloitte's report
was actually being implemented prior to
the Deloitte report being written?
That's correct. The, the, the system, uh,
I can't confirm the date, but
I'll take you with you for that.
Yeah. Uh, went live in, in June, 2024,
and the Deloitte reports obviously are later that year.
Um, I would note as well that we continue
to improve that system.
It's not a one and done. So ongoing improvements being made
To of, and you mentioned the benefits
of having consistent people enroll, um,
for the financial management of Health New Zealand.
Can you remind me
who fired all the people from the roles previously
of the Senior Executive of Health New Zealand?
No one was fired, uh, in the leadership team.
Many people, um, uh, ceased as a result
of the development of devolution, uh, where, for example,
there would be one person running hospital systems
across the whole country.
And then when we started the devolution process
and went to regional, obviously that is a, a
situation no longer wanted,
but there was, nobody was actually fired.
They just left with a lot of money,
it seems across the health system.
Well, people were, um, in the situation
that people's roles ceased.
They were paid, uh,
what they were due in the employment contracts. So
If we return to my colleague's question here, the two
benefits that you cited in terms of the current management
of Health New Zealand's, uh, financial system,
with the consistency of people in role, which is a response
to problems created
by restructuring done under the present government
and the, uh,
and a software system that was under development prior
to the current government coming in.
I, I think that's, uh, if you have a look at the detail
around the, that actually started with, um, uh,
before the previous government was the government,
before that it was part
of the Health Benefits Limited program.
I think that, uh,
people have changed quite a lot since
Health New Zealand started.
There's been a lot of change since 20 22, 23,
and that's all been contextual and we've moved past that.
And Bevin's not only talking about the executive level,
he's talking right throughout, uh, the, the system.
So the point is we're just trying to get to a point
where we can actually operate the system with the kind
of financial discipline that's required.
And primary.
Thank you. I'm trying to understand the myth
of the ringfence
because it's very difficult to find out
how we can measure outcomes when the accounting systems,
well, first of all, the organization's Health Quality Safety
Commission, the ministry, the minister,
everyone points at Health New Zealand.
Health New Zealand doesn't have a line item
that talks about $2.7 billion of mental health.
In fact, it is incorporated into other things.
So it's really difficult trying to understand value
for money when there is no, uh, line item.
Why do you not, uh, disaggregate
or get to the level of being able to show
what the mental health spend is in the regions
for specialist services for primary and community health
and for Copa Maori?
Because without that, it is very difficult
to understand whether we are getting value for money.
And yet we've had a 32% increase in the so-called ring
fence, which is around $674 million.
It also leaves, uh, the system open to double accounting
Point. We have a point
of order Dr. Campbell.
Um, we have a structured agenda, um,
and mental health is actually, um, in,
in the next part service area.
Speaking to the point of order, Mr. Chair, the problem
that I'm raising is that we are looking at a whole
of system financial management approach.
The very fact that I would be expected
to ask financial questions in something around
a disaggregated mental health segment shows
why it is a poor cousin of the health system.
This is a systems question that I think deserves an answer.
When we're looking at the system,
We are talking about the,
the first area organizational performance.
So if we can tie it into to that. Yeah,
And I, I think the commissioner understood the question
and I'm happy to wait for the answer.
Uh, we have five output classes
that we report into the annual report that have work
and work programs against them.
One of them, those output classes is mental health
and addiction services.
And we report against the output class
and also financials related.
But I'll hand over to our CFO,
So, so that we report against the
output class mental health.
That obviously comes from three different appropriations.
Correct. Uh, we then, uh,
we then obviously report against the key measures
of, um, mental health.
Uh, we do, um, budgeting at an initiative and line level,
and we track that at initial and live level at a monthly
and a quarterly basis so
that we can do our quarterly reporting.
So you obviously see the mental health, uh, output class,
quarterly reporting being, uh, delivered, uh, there.
So it's a, it's a detailed bottom up budget
and reporting against it.
And then the initiatives,
the non-financial, obviously as well
Supplementary, if I may, um, the minister referred
to the contracting arrangements in Health New Zealand
as being the outcome measures.
I've looked at many of those contracts,
and they are output measures,
as you've quite rightly said, the output classes.
Where in the system do we find the outcome measures in one
place for mental health, given that there is no specific
ringfenced budget in the system,
and yet we keep referring to this mythical ringfence?
So I think in the annual report,
you will see our reporting against mental health
and addiction services.
We also, in our quarterly monitoring reports report a number
of, uh, metrics related to mental health.
Um, a number of those are outputs,
and they were also inclusive of access.
Um, some measures, uh, quite hard to define in terms
of pure outcome and mental health.
And that's why we have both access measures as well
as patient reported measures, which are also very important.
If you look overall at sort of national, global measures
of outcomes, we, you do see an overall improving right back
to ex life expectancy, mortality rates.
You do see, uh, improvements there,
but that you are picking up on something that is difficult
to define in terms of specific outcomes.
And so often if you can't get an exact outcome,
you have access measures.
And those access measures, uh, mean
that people can access treatment services,
which we know have proven benefit,
which then leads to those outcomes.
Final question, if I may, Mr. Chair? Yes, you may.
Would it, would it be easier
to measure the outcomes if there was a line item
or a section on mental health rather than having it in the
three current class systems?
And secondly, do you accept
that there is a risk of double accounting?
For example, things that have been funded by MPI
and the rural sector have been announced
as mental health announcements within the ringfence,
when in fact the budget has come from a
completely different boat.
Uh, do you think it would be easier to organize yourselves
so that there is sufficient focus on mental health
and sufficient change to be able to be measured
that follows the money directly?
I think the current, uh, movement from the various
appropriations reflect where service delivery occurs.
So either in primary care, public health,
or our hospital services, uh, or her Maori.
So I mean, those are allocated decisions into buckets.
I mean, you could absolutely potentially re uh, look at that
as a potential option.
Uh, what we try to do is have measures that relate to each
of those areas and those output classes.
Uh, but there's, there's an ability to recut that, if
that makes more sense.
At the moment. Uh, the way that we deliver the majority
of services is thinking about primary community public
health, thinking about hospitals, uh,
and thinking about, in this case, for Maori as well
as a specific appropriation.
So I can see the logic of that system as well. Thank you.
So we just ask Phil, Grady to just add a bit more color
to these answers, Phil, heads up health.
Right. Look, um, and just to, to add to Dr.
Brandy's comments is we report quarterly to the Ministry
of Health on our RINGFENCE spend.
And to Bevan's point, that gets down to a, a granularity
of the budget and RC code.
So there is line of sight all the way through.
Um, and to your second point, which was around, um, line
of sight around where we've got joint funding.
So that reporting into the Ministry
of Health on a quarterly basis has direct line of sight
for the health contribution to that, uh,
particular initiative.
And is it fair to say they would be coalesce
around the output delivery?
Yeah, so output and again, not with rather than outcome.
Yeah. Notwithstanding, you know, Dr.
Brown's comments around, it's a bit tricky sometimes to get
to the bottom of the, um, um, outcomes.
But, um, yes, that's where it sits.
Just if I could, Mr.
Chair, uh, the point about outcomes is a good point,
and we do have an aspiration to shift from output.
We'll still have outputs,
but we have an aspiration to shift from outputs to outcomes.
It is quite challenging,
especially wanna get to the clinical section.
Our chief medical officer could touch on, uh, the outcomes,
but that, that is the destination.
Appreciate that. Thank you.
Okay. We have a primary from Dr. Vera.
Thank you. Uh, can you please describe the current state
with respect to budget
and other decision making in hospitals?
So we have, um, we have budgets, as Dale referred
to earlier, that have been built up, uh,
based on activity plans
and which were built up based on not just the regions,
but also the other delivery, uh, functions.
Uh, those budgets have been devolved to districts
and where possible to services within that.
Uh, as I mentioned before, in response
to the member's question, we haven't got that yet to the,
uh, detailed level of granularity that we would like.
Uh, but we do have all of our regions, all of our districts
and key service functions with the known, uh, budgets.
Uh, and, uh, we track those, as I also mentioned
before, on a monthly basis.
Um, thank you. I I, I'm gonna ask a set of questions just
to clarify exact exactly what that means.
So does that mean that information system has that level
of visibility, or are you telling me about who holds the
right to plan and spend the budget
and make decisions for the services as well?
Uh, both of those things are true.
The, uh, obviously the, um,
the financial system includes all of the budget information,
uh, at the level that I have described, um, in terms
of decision rights, that obviously then flows into the
delegations that we have in place.
Uh, and those are all, uh,
clear in the organization as well.
So it's not just in the financial system,
but also the delegations matrix
that you have, which dictates that.
Thank you. Um, I'll just continue. Yes, Mr. Chair.
So the, um, information system, does that mean that a head
of, um, a group in a hospital, uh,
will be able to see the same screen that you can see
in terms of their, um, uh, the budget they have
and their current spending rate and so on?
Um, they would probably work with their finance utterly
to access the screen as, as, as such.
But yes, they would be working off the same information,
which is, uh, we use the adaptive budgeting tool
and that then integrates into the f PIM financial system
for, uh, for.
And can you describe the delegation matrix
for who's making decisions about
how money gets spent in hospitals?
Uh, so the, it obviously cascades from the board, uh,
through, uh, Dale.
Uh, those delegations then flow, uh,
into the executive regional directors for, uh, hospitals.
Um, specifically ERDs have a $5 million CapEx.
Can you spell out for the sake of the record
what the ERD is, please?
Oh, executive regional director.
So we have the four executive, uh, regional, uh, directors.
Uh, for example, Dr. Andrew Paulette Brant is the executive
regional director for the northern region,
uh, here with us today.
Uh, so Dr. Brant, for example, he has a $5 million, uh,
delegation on, uh, CapEx.
So his team will have formed a capital
budget for, uh, the year.
And if those approved projects are within
$5 million, then Dr.
Brant can proceed with those, uh, projects
with no additional approvals, uh, required.
So let's, um, uh, take the example of a single hospital.
How many people have delegations
to spend money in that hospital?
Was it just someone as, as senior as Dr. Brant?
5 million probably doesn't reflect most of the, the, uh,
very high proportion of the, um, of the budget
for a hospital or a district I know.
So, uh, we have a delegations policy, which starts
with the board's delegation to me, and then cascading down.
That all goes all the way down to RC managers.
Um, so those are the, uh,
the very local managers that sit. What
Does RC stand for, please?
Um, responsible responsibility center managers.
So those people who have a budget assigned to them,
and then they have, uh, rights related to
that responsibility center.
So that sits in the delegations policy.
What we are currently doing with the movement to, uh,
strengthen devolution and to strengthen local services
and service delivery is reviewing that delegation policy
and strengthening the amount of decision making
that will be done locally as we move into this devolution.
I understand that. So to understand,
to contextualize whether that is a big change
or a small change, I'd just like to understand what,
what sort of person is the RC manager?
Did you say? Huh? Do they run a single department? Yes.
Are they the head of all surgery? You
Know, so they would be service managers.
They run a service such as, uh, plastics or orthopedics.
They would be charge nurses who run their wards.
So they would have the RC for their ward.
So they're usually people who have both, uh,
people responsibility.
Mm-hmm. And those report to them,
then they have a delegation around those people,
or where they have expenditure need to do clinical equipment
supplies that supply their areas,
then they have delegations related to that as well.
Can you explain to me, um, people at, at
that level in the health system, their situation, um,
say in, uh, 2018, in, in the DHB days,
would they have a similar level of delegation then?
Yes. By and large, they should have very similar levels
of delegations, uh, as we go through this next.
And the delegation movements that we are looking at now, uh,
uh, sort of at the higher levels of
what hospitals will be able to agree on
of themselves is the very thing we are looking to raise.
But at that very local level, a lot
of those delegations relate to their teams
and people, which should not have changed very much since
2018.
All the things that they need to order
and bring in to support that service,
they should be similar.
Um, but we'd have to do a direct comparison to,
to say if something had changed over time.
And, um, we discussed with the minister yesterday
that there are some, uh, funds that, um, are retained
by people higher up the, uh, management
chain in, in Health New Zealand.
What proportion of, uh, funds sit, uh,
outside the level of a district?
I think in terms of that context yesterday,
correct me if I'm not, uh, right here was
around the contingency that was held nationally.
Uh, yeah, but I'm, I'm using that as an example, right?
I just wanna know the balance of the, uh, people in,
in the districts deciding 80% of health New Zealand's
spending, or, um, a lot less.
Oh, nearly all decision making
that occurs in Health New Zealand
or where the budget is spent, is spent locally.
Uh, the delegations relate to at
what level do you need an additional level of scrutiny over
that decision to make sure it's value for money?
And that goes back to that delegation policy.
So the higher that level is, the more we want
to know about the relative return on the investment
or the outputs
or clinical, uh, outcomes that that will achieve.
And so this expenditure is still occurring locally.
Understood. I mean, that's truism, isn't it?
We have to spend the money in a place that,
but the, um, uh, who gets to decide where
to do the decision rights?
Where's the balance of decision rights
as a proportion of the overall funding?
So in terms of the expenditure,
the vast majority is absolutely local.
It's those really big decisions
that you have a new business case for, uh,
or a really significant amount of spend,
then those decision rights, uh, go higher up the chain.
Uh, now as we go through this devolution, uh,
change in policy, we will be lifting those devolution, uh,
those, um, uh, delegations much further so
that local hospitals will have even higher
delegations than they currently have.
If I may, just one final point of clarification, Mr.
Chair, to finish this question? Yes.
Um, the current state is, is that recorded in a document
and what is the name of that document?
Yes. So we have a current delegated, um,
authority, um, document.
And what we're doing now is the modifications to that
for the devolution, envi, uh, environment.
And that's, that's available.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, just so everyone knows, we, we are up to,
we have primaries waiting from Amish, myself,
Johanna, and Ingrid.
Can I join the list again, please, Mr. Chair?
Oh, of course you can. Dr.
Vel and Jenny Markoff,
that's in this first part, right?
Just, that's correct.
Brilliant. Thank you. Um, and,
and you've talked a lot about the evolution already,
um, this morning.
Uh, what progress has been made to move
to a regional structure and what still needs to happen?
Yes. So, um, if we just go back, the,
the most significant change to, um, health New Zealand,
of course, was when we, uh, changed in 2022
to 2023 with the, um, uh, the end
of the DHB era to the Health New Zealand.
That was the most significant change
that we have been through.
And then of course, there was this period of consolidation,
uh, around the merger
and the functions of the merger, uh,
when the commissioner was appointed, uh, at that point,
the devolution processes started to begin, uh,
and that included the establishment of four regions, uh,
and the appointment of regional leads into those areas.
Uh, as we have moved forward in recent, uh, months,
we've also seen things such
as permanent appointments go into those four regions.
You've got one of the leads here.
Uh, you have also seen how budgets relate to those regions,
uh, and those districts
and the establishment of regional
clinical governance functions, all of which have occurred.
In terms of our structure, we've also seen a devolution
of a number of functions.
So initially the planning
and funding outcomes was a single national function
that now is a national function, as well
as four regional functions.
So in terms of the $10 billion spend that occurs
around 8 billion has already devolved into the regions.
We've also been going through processes
to evolve our things such as emergency management systems,
health and safety systems, back
to regions at local districts.
Uh, as we move forward, uh, with this next wave,
we'll be looking to very much strengthen hospitals, uh,
and local districts and DDoS further,
but within a view of nationally, uh, national policy,
national design, regional co coordination,
and local delivery.
So we've been on this journey for some time,
and now we look to accelerate, uh, considerably.
Uh, and we have had also, uh, our letter
of expectations last week, which included, uh,
info requests, uh, to Health New Zealand about, uh,
accelerating that pace.
And so we are actioning that immediately to speed up
that evolution even further, I would say,
of our enabling services.
And those are things like people, culture, uh, digital
services, uh, we aim at 85%
of all staff are basically devolved
or working locally within districts.
If just for, can I just add, sorry, just, um, in, in terms
of the devolution, so the devolution will be completed at
the end of June of this year.
If you compare that, as Dale said, I initiated
that process in, uh, August of last year.
So it's about be about a two year process,
Ireland as a comparison.
I know all systems are different, took five years.
NHS is not completed 10 years.
Uh, Canada started in 2013, not yet completed.
So ours, our devolution has actually happened quite quickly.
The last elements are with Dale as chief executive
to finish now before the end of June.
There are no further decisions
to be taken at a governance level.
Uh, there are some risks associated
with an accelerated devolution like that,
and of course we putting mitigations in
place to deal with that.
But, uh, it is, you know, a very quick process
as regards the delegations.
For example, we expect Dale's delegations as chief executive
to be doubled, and that'll filter right
through the organization.
So people's freedom to make decisions at a local level,
which is our aspiration, will be set in place.
The one thing, I guess, and Dr.
Brown's question, maybe just to add to that, uh,
people have got quite a lot of freedom currently to spend,
but nobody, and I don't expect any
of you would expect we would do this.
Nobody's got the freedom to spend beyond their budget. Okay.
So, and that's why this next budget is really important,
because this will be probably the first time in history,
really, that there's a truly authentic bottom up production
plan and budget, because the production plan is
as important as the budget.
Excellent, thank you. And just for clarification,
did you say that the, um,
the devolution process started in August last year? August
Last year, Yeah. Excellent.
Thank you. What, what, why did,
why ha have you decided to take a regional structure?
Sorry, I understand. Why, why did we need to go back
to a, a regional structure?
Well, the organization's just way too big.
Uh, there's too much distance between
where the decisions were being made
and where the action is happening.
Uh, uh, uh, perhaps I should add,
when we first spoke about devolution,
we weren't talking about simply, um, devolution
around management and accounting issues.
We really think about clinical devolution.
That's the most important part.
So, for example, we have clinical networks, which, uh,
guests don't get such a high profile,
but are really important because the clinical networks are
now something to ask, perhaps ology to give some color
to what's happening in ophthalmology for an example.
So, uh, productivity, the productivity will really be driven
by clinicians, and these elements
of devolution are really quite important.
So thank you, uh, Lisa? Yes.
Um, in ophthalmology, the clinical network has, which,
which clinician driven has, um,
constructed essentially agreed national rules of, uh,
production and engagement, such as the, uh, minimum number
of cases on a public operating list,
taking into account our need
to train the next generation of I cs.
It's also been a major move to devolve many of the, uh,
things that traditionally an eye surgeon would've done
to follow up patients by working in consultation,
in collaboration with our optometry colleagues.
And this, um, not only speeds up access for patients, uh,
and timeliness of their review
after cataract surgery in particular,
but it creates capacity for new patients
because the ophthalmic surgeon is, um, able to have,
uh, capacity created in their worksheet.
And by doing this regionally,
we can take into account the various dynamics.
So obviously the northern region has metropolitan Auckland
with three districts that, uh, leads to different
opportunities and way of constructing the details versus,
say, the geographical differences of the south island.
So we believe the regional approach led
by the district clinicians, sorry, uh, has, um,
the opportunity to deliver a lot of value.
Okay. We've got some SAPs here from Ingrid
and Asha Ingrid.
Yeah, it's really interesting listening to the, um,
systematic approach.
I'm trying to understand what
difference it will make on the ground.
For example, we had see the house close last year.
We were told that was an operational decision.
Uh, what difference will your new system make
for those types of decisions?
That was very controversial.
Ministers have said it's operational,
and yet we see them stepping into fund,
provide bridging finance for one stop shops.
But there's two parts to the question.
One is, would something like Seeger house under the new
system be able to be stay open?
And secondly, how do you, what are your roles
around operational?
Um, because it's very difficult to understand.
When ministers don't wanna make decisions,
they point the finger at you.
And there are a lot of people in Auckland who say
that was the wrong decision, given that any,
any health system should have a tertiary level
facility like Seager House.
And that has been vindicated by the WHO.
So I can give some insights into
how the system operates currently, including
around, uh, that decision.
And then Phil can fill in the picture, as it were.
But when the question of Seagart house came up, um,
my role was to ask the local district, on
what basis are you making that recommendation?
Uh, and are you satisfied about that recommendation?
And I received those assurances directly from
the local district.
So in fact, it wasn't regional national decision making
there that was very much seen
as a local integrated mental health services, part
of their wider services.
Uh, and my role was to ask the lead
for Auckland City Hospital.
In fact, what was the basis for that decision?
Are you satisfied with that decision?
Was it clinically, uh, involved and engaged?
And so those answers came back to me that, yes,
that was a clinically led decision that was fully informed
by the folks from Auckland, uh, district as it were.
But I'll hand over to Did, did
You, were you assured
that also the consultation had happened
with the wider stakeholders,
or did you only get the assurance from
the team lead, for example?
No, I seek assurance
around making sure due process has occurred as well.
Uh, and that means, you know, they went
through a consultation process, uh,
getting the feedback from that consultation process,
and then making sure that that feedback was considered along
with the clinical imperatives that they were trying
to address, which I understand,
and again, this is an example of facts,
even in the current system,
a very local decision being made, uh, uh,
that there was relatively low volumes of, uh, clients going
through that service, accepting that it was a,
those people were very much viewed that
as a very good service for them,
but the team was of the view they could get more, uh,
mental health from using that resource in another way.
And it's important, from my perspective, that's what I rely,
that they make those very good clinical judgements,
and they've listened to the feedback
before they make a decision. Or
Although the media reported that the,
the system was set up so they couldn't take higher volumes,
and they also had an alternative business plan,
which did not seem to be considered in
the decision to close.
So I'm wondering, in the new system,
will those broader considerations be taken into account?
They could potentially lead to a different outcome?
Look, Um, I just look, just to reinforce Dr.
Cony and Dr. Brandy's comments, this was the local decision.
It was a, you know, clinical decision, you know, the, the,
the clinical clinicians
and clinical leaders in consultation with those
that are using the services and the staff,
and I can't comment around what played out in the media,
but the clinical decision was that for the small group,
the interventions that they re were receiving at Seger house
would be better applied in the community, um,
by the community teams,
and particularly around, um, uh, DBT dialectal, um,
behavioral therapy, um,
and community settings with those supports.
In addition, the, you know, the resource that was, uh,
previously replied to, uh, CIGA house was then put out
to the districts to pick up responsibility
for delivering the services, the replacement services,
and there were strong transition plans for those, um,
affected people and, uh, their families
to transition to the community.
Just have a quick follow up from Ingrid on that,
and it's around, um,
clinical leaders involved in decision making.
Um, how does this play out in practice?
And to what extent is clinical advice incorporated, um,
into Health New Zealand plans and budgets and priorities?
So, bring Richard Sullivan, our Chief Clinical Officer up,
and this is in, uh, an area, uh,
in the current environment, uh,
before we, you know, complete devolution in June.
Uh, we have very active, uh, clinical engagement
around course the executive
and any decisions that are made have full,
uh, clinical participation.
We are very fortunate in, uh, as we have, um,
re uh, establish the executive team that we have, uh,
more clinicians on the executive team than
we've had previously.
So the clinical voice at that table
and decision making is now very strong.
And in our governance forums too, we have a several, uh,
clinically qualified people.
So at the governance level, we have strength there.
In terms of the networks, uh, Dr. Sullivan has worked
to establish 13 clinical networks.
Those clinical networks are now engaging
with the executive directly, so we can hear, uh,
their recommendations
and how they might see clinical practice improving.
Uh, so again, I think that is a, a new strength
where we can pull on the whole clinical network
of the country to give us advice straight into the decision
making of the executive and the board.
And as we move into a devolution environment,
what we are going to be doing, uh,
very shortly is making sure that our local clinical leaders
who already have, I mean,
the reality is in a local hospital, the, uh, chief nurse
and, uh, chief Medical Officer, chief Allied Health
and all of their senior staff are very much engaged in the
running of those businesses, uh, running
of the clinical services.
How we can strengthen that further in terms
of our budget development, our production planning, right,
from that grassroots up level,
but hand over to Richard. Yeah, it's
A great question and, um, potentially quite a long answer.
So I'll try and be succinct.
Um, because I think Dale sort of set the scene, uh,
you know, when House New Zealand came into, I guess,
you know, role, I, um, hold was sort of established, um,
across the whole of clinical leadership.
So I think it's important to recognize that was trying
to elevate the view of midwifery, nursing, allied health,
scientific, technical, so everyone in a clinical leadership
role, one of the things we did initially, uh, uh,
from a kind of a national
and regional level was say, well, what does that look like?
And how do we kind of create that environment?
And so you may recall, we went through a review
of the clinical leadership, uh, and then we've established
and now appointed across the whole country, uh,
district clinical leaders including, uh, new roles of, of,
of local district midwives.
So they were, most of the midwife free leadership roles
initially were wrapped up in nursing roles.
So we separated that out
because we saw it was a really important,
uh, space to invest.
Um, as part of that, uh, which links to the sort of the,
the solid evolution conversation was
what does regional leadership look like?
Uh, and so we have what we call a portfolio model.
So a local, uh,
district clinical leader may hold a regional portfolio
that may be as a chief nurse or as a chief dock,
or it could be around workforce
or around other components to try
and engage within the ERD model.
Um, and we've got a very live conversation right now,
which is, um, what Dale's alluded to around
what does local leadership look like at Ward, at a,
at a service, um, and at a GDO district level.
And we have quite a variation in, in how that,
how that plays out at the moment.
Um, so we're really trying to, uh, drive forward, uh, uh,
what is the framework around partnership look like?
So, you know, if you've got a service manager
or a GDO that runs a local hospital, how are they partnered
by their chief doc news,
allied health midwifery, uh, et cetera.
Look, that's very much in an evolution phase at the moment.
So we are in, in conversations
around how do you make that work?
That links to the delegation conversation as well.
So please, who gets the authority
to make those financial decisions?
In a previous life, um, I had the, um, pleasure
of running the Northern Region Cancer service,
and I had to delegate authority around the budgets, the FTE,
et cetera, in that role, and,
and then subsequent move into surgery.
So we've seen that success in the system,
but we've got a lot of variations, I say where we are.
So there's a, there's a, a pathway to go.
And then probably the, the last point around the,
the networks, um, as Dale said, that, uh, we're starting
to see the, the, the, um, the benefits of networks start
to play out now that took, uh, some time to get 'em involved
and to work out where they sit in the system
and how to get advice.
Uh, um, uh, um, Dr. Conley gave the example
of the eye health network.
We've seen that the same in radiology.
We're starting to see that in cardiology, uh, um, trauma.
So, um, we're starting to get that advice, um,
but we've still got the connection between the network
and the region and the district to, to strengthen.
So there's still some work to do in that space.
Thank you for your responses there, Dr. Vel.
Um, is it correct
that the clinical networks were announced on the
11th of June, 2023?
The concept mm-hmm. Or the networks? Yeah.
Uh, I can't recall the exact
date, but it was a long time ago.
Yes, I can speaking
True. And,
uh, given that, um,
our government announced those networks, can you explain
why they're now linked to this devolution concept
and how, so what's, what's changed?
Because the networks seem to me to be independent of, of
that and always a link between the national and the,
and the local wasn't,
Wasn't suggesting that at all, and sorry,
but it came across that way.
No, the more strength of the, of the, so
that when the networks were set up, they were set
as national structures,
but what we didn't have is a link to a region.
So you had a national network,
but how does the national network connect with a region?
How does the national network connect with the district?
And so that's the thinking we've been doing
as we establish a national networks, which, uh,
I think have been a success.
Um, and, you know, very proud of some of work
that colleagues are doing in those spaces,
but it is the, it is the connecting back into the region,
you know, that question about how does a region, you know,
sort of work collectively together?
And then was a, how's the local team know what the networks
that, you know, how do they get engaged?
So that's the, the, I guess the
matrix we're trying to solve.
Could I just, can I just add that, you know,
we've got three, I think, key platforms that we started, um,
previous year, and that is about devolution,
clinical leadership and culture and the overlapping context.
And all of these elements are within that framework.
So for example, devolution will tell you
where the decision is made,
but culture will tell you how the decision is made,
and clinical leadership will talk to the degree
to which clinicians are involved in that.
So for example, if you've got a spectrum
or a continuum from totally clinical to totally non-clinical
at the clinical end, it's clinically led.
Clinicians will make the decision in the mid-range point,
they will be involved,
and in the distal point they'll be engaged.
So that this is a whole process
of bringing everything together.
So we don't see these things as linear and discreet.
And of course that model is in development.
Thank you. We have a primary from Ingrid Leary,
have a primary from Dr.
Thank you. I'd like to ask about your work
to grow the health workforce,
both within the directly employed and community sector.
Can you, um, or funded sector, can you
give a high level summary of what you see as the
challenging areas in, in workforce?
So I can start, and we have our people
and culture lead here as well.
To be clear, this isn't a question about
industrial relations, so. Sure,
Sure. Of
course. Um, so when we look at our clinical workforce,
we, uh, have been looking to grow that clinical workforce,
medical nursing, allied health, uh, and support workers.
Uh, and in fact, over the last, um, two years,
we've seen an uplift of 6.3% in medical, 12% in nursing,
midwifery, seven, allied scientific 12.
So that's a very pleasing.
At the same time, we've also, when we look at our vacancy
rates and our turnover, uh, we have moved
to historic flows on both of those.
So since the inception of New Zealand,
then we are now at our lowest level of turnover,
which is pleasing
'cause it means people are staying,
uh, with Health New Zealand.
Uh, and of course, every time we do get turnover, um,
that takes some time to replace people.
So overall, I would say that the workforce continues to grow
and mental health, uh,
we have the target as well, of course.
Um, we are around 460 to 70 people last year,
and 500 is the target this year, uh,
unless I'm mistaken, I,
I asked Phil Grady about that regularly.
We are very close to the 500 number.
So we have targets in specific areas
and then, uh, in primary care, uh,
and we have, uh, our funder lead here too.
We have, um, uh, looking for significant growth both in,
uh, medical students
and placements, uh, into, uh, GP
and GP training programs, uh, nurse practitioners,
another a hundred there,
and also nursing positions into, uh, primary
and community services.
We've just announced the 1800, uh,
nursing threads, uh, last week.
So we are looking to grow our medical workforce within the
resources that we have available to us.
Uh, now that doesn't mean that we don't absolutely have some
more difficult areas to recruit to,
and we have absolutely been experiencing that.
So some areas of mental health, psychiatry, intensive care,
uh, have been difficult.
So we can have them in specific subspecialties, uh,
where it can take very long time to recruit into those.
And we may have to go through recurring recruitment rounds.
Uh, we often too can, uh, need people from overseas
to help us with that.
That can take some time.
And of course, we find that it's quite a big change
for somebody to come overseas,
and sometimes people can withdraw at the last moment.
So we see that. So we have specific, uh, uh, issues
and disciplines, and we also have specific areas
around the country where it's harder for people to attract.
And sometimes that's just the population base that's in
that area and where people settle
through choice of their own.
And so, um, we've seen that in places like Rafati.
Uh, for example, uh, we're trying to recruit a number
of extra staff into Nelson Malborough, for example.
So where we have specific geographical areas, pleased to say
with Rafati, where we have been trying, uh, very hard to
lift the vacancies that have been there.
We've dropped from between 40 and 50% below 30%.
Now we should be around 25% by Christmas
or other things being equal.
So, uh, the other thing I would say
that even when we have vacancies, we look to fill the role
so that we still have full rosters, uh, with locums
and with others on, um, fixed term contracts.
Our view about that is that's not ideal.
We would absolutely like to minimize those,
and those trends are improving, uh,
and we've got more work to do there to ensure,
especially in our more provincial hospitals,
that they're fully staffed with permanent staff
and our priorities always will be quality and safety.
I just ask a set supplement, Chris, to expand on on those.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. If we start with, uh,
those medical specialties that you identified
as particularly challenging, um, do you,
and you mentioned psychiatry
and intensive, intensive care as examples.
Do you have the levers you need to be able to, uh, uh,
grow those workforces over the longer time?
I mean, you are a trainer, but are the, the ability to, um,
uh, boost, uh, the pipeline
of trainee doctors into those positions?
Do you have the tools that you need at your disposal?
You need different regulatory tools or help from colleges?
What's the, what will make a difference there?
Yes. Well, actually, Dr. Conley might be best to answer
that Israel Council as well. Uh, very
Interesting questions. The medical
council has made some, uh, significant changes,
um, to how overseas trained specialists in a number
of fields are assessed, which has sped things up.
The Council of Medical Colleges has engaged very well on
aspects of where we train historically.
My college, which is the College of Surgeons, had some
fairly strict rules, um, particularly about whether,
uh, how many locally
vocationally trained surgeons had to be present.
And those rules have been amended,
which does open up our capacity to train, um,
psychiatry, I'd have to probably defer to Phil, um,
but, uh, is a popular specialty for registrars.
Um, and we are in discussions, uh, regularly.
Certainly at a, at my experience, the middlemore
around our ability
to train more registrars given there is the reliance
on locum psychiatrist.
So there's a tension there that's being addressed.
Um, and the changes to, uh,
uh, things such as introduction
of the general practice training pipeline,
which has been done with a lot
of support from the medical council, um,
we obviously hope will help considerably.
Um, I'll come back to that on the matter of, um,
and, uh, Nelson Hospitals are the,
are specialists or doctors
because our doctors in those hospitals paid the same
as doctors in metropolitan, uh, hospitals.
And are you doing, if not,
are you doing anything to fix that?
I know they're on the same mecca.
Yes, I was gonna start with that.
So, uh, there's of course a foundational mecca, uh,
and then there's allowances, uh, over and above that.
And then also responsibilities
that people might get additional pay for,
and then there's job sizing as well.
So what we see, uh,
around the whole country is a very high degree of variation,
uh, that's historic.
Uh, and it's quite difficult to harmonize.
Uh, we have a program of work going on now,
which is looking at REM for senior medical offices
and how we might try to move that,
but you will also appreciate that that requires engagement
with the union as well, uh,
or unions as it might be if it's relating to RMO.
So it is a piece of work that we are working on now, uh,
but it is very historically set.
Yeah. And very high degree of variation around the country.
Thank you. Um, you mentioned the, um, Mr. Chair. Thanks.
The, um, desire to get more, uh,
general practice trainees.
It's a desire common, I think, to all, um,
parties in parliament in, um, 2022,
Andrew Little announced, uh, 300 GP training places,
and yet the, those places are funded but not filled.
What are the remaining barriers to filling those places
that it's so important to taken up?
Uh, so we, we would completely agree with that.
So the, the more registrars we can get into the training
program and to effectively support them to become, uh,
vocationally registered general practitioners, uh,
health New Zealand, very supporting
of anything that we can do there.
We are looking at, at the moment training programs
for PGY ones
and PGY twos to put them into a, um,
give them much more exposure to primary care, um,
in the hope that they will then go on into those registrar
training programs and become vocationally registered.
I think we've got something there to about the, um, general
appeal of primary and community services
because, you know, people make choices of course,
and some are some specialties, you know, over time, uh, wax
and wane in terms of the, the appeal of that.
Um, part of, uh, our role too is to try
and make primary care more appealing.
Uh, and hence, you know, the idea that we need
to keep boosting, uh, very much the funding
that we are putting into primary care, making sure
that it's sustainable, uh, in primary care
and giving people more junior medical staff, more exposure
to primary care, uh, with mentoring.
So it's a more attractive specialty.
So, uh, we are very much focused on all of that as well.
And then working with primary care
and primary care leaders, uh, around how we can do exactly
as you've described,
Supplementary, the, uh, general practices.
Some general practitioners will argue their salary is
markedly less than, uh, specialists in the hospital system.
They general practitioners are also, uh, specialists.
How are you saying that the way to address that gap is
through increasing capitation funding
or whatever other funding goes into general practice?
They, by increasing the profitability, thereby allowing them
to pay themselves more, is that the, is that the best way
to address that issue?
No, but I think it is absolutely one factor
and a hygiene factor that you could say for them.
The other thing is the appeal of the clinical specialty,
the ability for them to potentially do subspecialization.
And we're seeing more of that, you know, people, um,
might take an interest in skin lesions or urgent care
or, um, creating other opportunities to extend scopes
of practice for them and us being supportive of that.
So I think that's also, uh, very much about that.
The other thing is, I think, uh, the relationship
and culture that exists,
and I think Health New Zealand has a role to play in this
between the local, uh, general practice and the hospital.
Uh, we have gone through a period where, you know, a number
of us have worked where there were very strong
relationships, uh,
and you, you knew your special specialists
and you knew your gps.
And I think some of that has reduced over time.
So we are looking to reestablish very strongly, uh, laning
or networks around hospitals.
We are actual the interactions between clinicians at occur.
And then I, so I think we've got a role to play in that
to sort of improve, uh, that dialogue
and culture across the medical workforce so
that we can be seen as very much, um, working as, uh, uh,
integrated system.
I, I think all of those things come to job satisfaction, uh,
as well as workload issues.
So, uh, you know, I absolutely think it's multi-factorial.
Final question. Um, the, uh, increased number
of medical students will, um,
result in new graduates in 2029
from the funding announced in 2023
and further increases thereafter.
Uh, have you, um,
costed the impact of employing those graduates,
which we all agree we need in the health system?
So we, so we're doing, uh, oh, bring Robin Ra,
who's our people cultural lead.
So we're absolutely looking at that issue right now.
And we're also looking at things like mentoring
and supervision and making sure
that we have sufficient places available so
that when they come, uh,
we are not in a rush to find people.
So that is absolutely all in our planning right now
to be doing those things. But Robin,
Yeah, we are working with all universities, not just
by Kato, and I
Think you need to speak into a microphone
for the transcription.
Sorry. We are working with all the universities in terms
of growing capacity for not only medical students,
but a multidisciplinary approach, particularly in rural, um,
placements in primary care.
So this is an opportunity over the next, um, excuse,
Excuse me. Just to, just to
clarify, my question wasn't about the
universities, it was once they're in the health system,
have you budgeted the, um, the training
and employment of those, of those
Doctors? Uh, we, we are
working on that as we speak.
So we are working closely with the Ministry of Health.
Um, partly why I mentioned the universities is
because they're an important partner
in the training process.
And also, uh, what we are planning on is
how we place students in what district
and what area according to need.
Jenny Crot.
Thank you. And, and just really following on, um,
on this train of thought, um, in terms of,
um, the rural program, um, I think year six
in Otago has about 300 students, 34 in the rural program.
What, what are you doing, um, to increase that program so
that we then get more, um, trained doctors out into the,
the rural areas, whereas the greater need,
particularly in regions, like in the far north, um,
and what more support should those students be receiving?
How many primaries to get out into the regions?
So there's several factors with
how we support rural workforce growth.
Uh, one is use of digital options for supervision
and clinical supervision.
So using, uh, building on the rural training hub approach
and also what we're looking at with the white,
all the universities supporting places where, um,
they're using different ways of mentoring
and supporting either, um, junior practitioners
with senior mentoring and support that can be via telehealth
or digital options, as well
as having those rural training hubs so that, um, more of the
smaller centers can be supported with, uh, giving support
and supervision to their classrooms.
So, so how will, um, students on the rural program who go
to white
or hospital, for example, which is so many locums, are at
that hospital, so they're not having, um, that
that same level of support
and mentoring when they're on that rural program.
What are you doing to address those sorts of
Issues? Yeah, so I think
it's a combination of being connected
to the larger center via, um, being able
to do telehealth support.
If a person can't be there directly with the clinician
or having visiting, um, visiting senior clinicians who come
through to support those, uh, trainees as well.
Might want. Sorry,
I was gonna say just a couple of comments.
'cause um, this is a, um, topic close to my heart. Oh.
Um, uh, so we're doing quite a lot of work.
Um, I think rural inc if I could put it that way,
because, uh, I guess my observation
or our observation would be that over the years,
MES has become super specialized, you know, almost
to the little finger doctor.
Um, and so the rural, you know, care
and the rural access for our, our, our,
our communities has, has really struggled.
So we've been working with the colleges,
the college physicians is looking at a rural model.
Uh, the college of gps obviously has a rural model.
And then, yeah, there's a college, uh, called, which is a,
uh, a sort of a, again, a rural based specialist,
and we have obstetrics and anesthetics.
So you're not a obstetrician, you're not an anesthetist,
but you're a rural specialist
who's got expertise in these areas.
And in fact, we had a very large workshop last week with all
of the, uh, group to try to look at how collectively we can,
uh, increase that rural model of training, uh,
get the support in, but what does it actually look like?
And we see it as an and, and, and. Mm-hmm.
Um, so we see that, you know, every, uh, you know,
college open the doors,
but like Andrew's example around the College of surgeon
and shifting their, you know, the framework that,
and so far very positive, um, college,
you know, it's gonna take some time.
We, the West coast was accredited against
this, one of these models.
Uh, recently we've got models coming out of Typo.
So we've got some districts that are doing quite a good job,
but we're looking to how can we actually, um, sort
of scale that across the country.
Uh, so looking at a framework to come up
to try and solve some these problems.
Yeah. Right. One primary, I've just got
a couple more subs, Mr.
Chair. When, when we've got students that are from Australia
training in New Zealand, um, a number of them do return
to Australia, uh, for PGY one, what impact does
that have on the flow of the pipeline
of young students coming in?
Are those numbers something of concern?
Is there a, a glitch in the system there? Something they're,
They're pretty small.
Um, uh, so I think that, um, you know, if you,
if you talk about, uh, going
through medical school training, yeah.
Um, and then at the end of that, your year six,
you go into your house surgeon year.
So we really employ, uh, you know, 98% of, of
that workforce is a small amount of international students,
um, that are often, you know, don't go
through the initial matching process,
but in reality, we tend to pick them up as well.
And so the last few years, the majority of those
who want a job in New Zealand have,
have been given a job in New Zealand.
But to your point, some people come
and, you know, just trained, trained and then head back.
Yeah. Yeah. And what, and what about the priority
that's given for students, um,
when they do go into year six, uh, Kiwi,
Kiwi trained New Zealander
or New Zealand trained Kiwis,
are they the highest priority for going into those roles?
Yes. And what other priority levels are they? Um,
It, it scales, uh, from, um,
new Zealander trained in New Zealand.
Yeah. Um, overseas, uh, such
as Australia next, um, Australian, sorry,
training here, and then all the way down to, uh,
foreign students, which is,
you may ask why they prioritize lower, it's more to do
with their residential status, right.
And when they're entitled to stay,
and the agreements under which often their host country,
their, their own country has funded their medical education,
because we, some of it is that, um,
but, uh, most, most graduates, um,
obtain work in the district they wish to work in, um,
not all, but most do.
And it's got, I think, a lot better.
And we have seen, um, for instance, again, at counties,
a lot of students returning
because they've grown up in the, in the South Auckland area.
Uh, so that, um, those ties are appreciated.
And if I may just in response, Dr.
Drill's question one other change to try
and improve general practice.
Um, retention of the registrars has been a change in the
funding, which used to be very heavily in the first year.
For some reason it's now been, um, altered, which
ran some little early to know the outcome of that.
But we hope that retains more.
And for the medical students who are in rural locations, uh,
I think I'm correct in saying they link into the university
education program with the peers who are, say,
doing their clinical attachments in bigger centers.
So there's quite a lot of support.
Um, but, uh, we would not have, um,
students unsupervised.
Uh, but the challenges are there,
and it's that if we grow the registrars grow the number
of house surgeons doing primary
and rural as their in their first two years, uh,
that will all support and probably encourage the students
because we know their student experience leads a lot
to their longer term career aspirations.
Final, final question,
Add that, sorry.
Uh, just in terms of your question, if you have a look,
for example, is the ACE nurse matching system
where the nurses get matched to rules.
One of the business rules in that is, uh, you have
to be a domestic, you have
to be New Zealand resident or citizen.
That doesn't, uh, international students who come down
and qualify nursing do not get matched in
the as matching system.
So, okay. And just my final question, um,
don't do that again, Sam.
I've still got, so, I, I, final, final, is that all right?
Um, can you just briefly give us an update?
Um, how is working in terms of, um,
the program for,
So the, Yeah,
just get a general update and, oh, sorry.
Kiara, um, international director Holder Maori, lovely
to be here, um, with members.
And thank you to the chair.
Um, as you are all aware, there is a review
of the Mapas program, uh, as a support mechanism
for Maori Pacific students into, uh, medical careers.
Uh, there has been, um, and,
and that's a program led by the ministry.
So, um, I won't speak on the findings of that,
they're still going through its process,
but, uh, what I am aware of is that there has been positive,
uh, findings from that program.
Um, all students going through medical practice have
to achieve the same, um, benchmarks around their scores and,
and existing, uh,
however, it has, uh, demonstrated
that we now have a increasing pipeline of Maori
and Pacific Health practitioners, which
of course is a positive, uh, so that we have a workforce
that better reflects the patients
that we serve in our hospitals and in community.
And those, um, graduates are now flowing
through into Health New Zealand, which is very pleasing.
Um, uh, it wasn't that long ago there,
there have not many ma doctors, uh, including myself,
but in the last year,
we had another 34 come into Health New Zealand,
and now we're over 540 Maori doctors, uh, working with us.
Uh, the other thing is, if you look at our Maori workforce
overall, it's went from seven, I think about 7.7
to 8.7 in the last year.
So we are seeing a very, uh, rapid, uh,
increase storm more to go there. Alright.
Can I just add chair? Sorry. Um, sure. When Dr.
Burrell asked a question, what could we do?
One of the things we're trying to do to obtain
and affect pe uh, doctors in particular is, uh,
high tech equipment.
So work on a program at the moment
for a very significant upgrade that we hope to complete
by the end of this financial year
of our high tech equipment,
because that is really quite important, uh,
for doctors coming from overseas
or doctors in New Zealand is returning.
So that's one thing we can do.
The other thing we can improve our facilities,
which we're working on because for example,
in intensive care, you need
to meet accreditation standards and have some issues.
So we are really doing our best to do all of that.
So it's, it's many of these things,
but we're trying to work on all of those
as quickly as we can. Thank
You, Mr. Supplementary.
Thank you, Larry.
Um, it'll come as no surprise that the experience
of the workforce force on the ground is
that they're feeling burned out.
We've got record numbers of people, new Zealanders going
to Australia, 73,000 people over the last year.
And we are hearing your numbers about safe staffing
and the quality assurance,
but it's not helpful when the numbers don't match
because I have a, an answer from, um, minister Brown
that says that the Dunedin Hospital Emergency Department is
short of 8.4 full-time equivalents.
When I look at the data council number,
that is 16.7 0.75 full-time equivalents that are missing.
And that is a number that you have contracted as part
of your contract for services.
There was also an assurance from Minister Brown that
where there are gaps that, that there would be recruitment.
And we looked and there was no recruitment happening
for those gaps, even though the minister admitted
that there was one area of short staffing.
I'm raising this because the reality on the ground is very
different for the workforce
because their numbers are different.
Why aren't you recruiting on the ground?
And how is it that when you've contracted
for these safe staffing levels,
we are getting answers from the minister's office,
which would've come from, uh, advisors
that are wildly different from the numbers
that have been agreed to contractually with the ZD now.
Uh, okay.
So I, I'll just try
and, um, answer that in a a, a series of ways.
The first is, uh,
at any one time Health New Zealand is recruiting, thousands
of people are in our pipeline.
So that pipeline goes from sourcing, uh, to advertising
through to interviews, and then offer of a contract.
And, uh, we, we, we see that information regularly,
and I, um, have just received it again
in the last couple of days.
There are currently, um,
several thousand people in that pipeline.
And terms of numbers recruited over the last year,
both internal and external, it's over 10,000.
So we are continuously recruiting.
Uh, we absolutely have some hard to recruit two areas,
which we acknowledge,
and sometimes we end up in recurring recruitment cycles
where it might not look like anyone's been appointed.
'cause in fact, it's very hard to get some specialties.
I think that's, so it's, uh,
that second thing I would say. Can,
Can I just say that we looked for the advertisements,
so not for the recruitment cycle,
but what, what was shown on the platforms
that nurses would be looking at?
Just to clarify that part of the
Ah, okay. So
then I would move to you.
I think you've moved into the, um, NZNO
and, uh, nursing vacancies.
So again, um, we've got Robin here.
Uh, we can say overall, uh,
nursing numbers have continued
to uplift over the last two years, and I,
and I gave those information, we've got 1800 approved about
to come in, and then we can absolutely have some timing
issues, uh, around individual, uh,
recruitment processes and advertising. But Robin,
Yes, I think, um, just to say in terms of the, um,
the recruitment happens at a district level
and managers, uh, make a decision based on their
rostering needs and practices
and priorities and, and their budget.
Budget of
Course. And so if they're
not recruiting,
it may be a budget constraint.
Uh, they may be having to work within, um, their budget.
Of course, that's a practice that we've done in health
for many years, and that continues.
So it is important to have fiscal responsibility and,
and line with also clinical need and priority
and managers,
operational managers are balancing those decisions every day
in terms of how they recruit
and the process that they use to do that.
So if there are these disparities in the numbers,
do they have enough budget to be a,
Um, I don't think that's an easy question to answer.
I think that, um, managers do work very closely
with their clinical leads on
where they might prioritize their recruitment decisions
and their budgets and planning.
And that is important. It's something we can get better at.
And, um, that goes down to, uh, looking at areas of need.
Um, as Dale had said,
the recruitment pipelines can sometimes take some time
and also juggling different work, acute, acute areas,
for example, um, specialties.
So that is a,
an operational decision that is worked through.
My second, if I may, um, is just to, to Dr. Levy,
which was, you talked about the 500 mental
health staff plan.
We know from the draft that we saw that the gap was 1500
and there was some toing for
and froing between yourself and the minister's office.
Don't you accept it would be more useful
to understand the need
and have that in the plan rather than
simply a, an arbitrary target? Oh,
Sorry. There was, you're
talking about the 500 mental
Health? Correct. And
the original draft identified a a gap of 1500,
and then we saw a final report that only mentioned 500.
So the 500 I was referring to
as the formal mental health target.
So one of the five health targets that we report against.
Right. Un understood. The question is about why aren't you
reporting on the need rather than on the target?
Wouldn't that be more useful?
Uh, well, we do have vacancy rates, uh,
and we do report our vacancy rates,
including for mental health.
What we have is then a number over
and above that that we trying to add in.
And then over and above even the target and Phil can, um, so
We saw the need, we saw the need taken outta your,
please don't interrupt, sorry.
But I'm just, um, thank you.
I'm trying to get to the number of the question,
which is the need was taken out, the report
in future going forward, wouldn't it be useful
to have the need, even if the target is different
and there is a discussion around budget
and affordability, wouldn't transparency
around the need be a useful number
to have in a formal mental health plan,
rather than it having it be removed between the first draft
and what is presented by the minister?
Um, uh, England, I'll try to look the look, there is a,
um, a prevalent survey that's, uh,
underway from the Ministry of Health.
So that sits outside the, um, health New Zealand domain.
And I think there's a bit that goes into that kind
of strategic context, which also sits
with the Ministry of Health.
But you know, what I can talk to is in addition to
what, you know, you know, Dr.
Brandley spoke to, is that we've got a target of, uh,
you know, 500 in terms of the mental health workforce,
and we're well on the way to, uh, uh,
touch for achieving that.
Um, in addition, um, we've had, you know,
within mental health,
we've actually had really strong growth in terms of nursing.
So we've actually been, um, up in terms of nursing to, um,
between September 23 to, uh, September 25 by
around 13.9%.
Um, and it's also at the same time a reduction in vacancy.
So, um, yes, there are still some challenges
around our psychiatry, uh, roles.
So just to be, I think Dr. Brownie, uh, touched on that.
That's why the target is really important in terms
of getting the, um, uh, the, the stage once, uh,
psychiatric re registrars into the program.
We had a target of 50, we're actually at, uh, 48, um,
uh, against that.
So we are trying to look at it in terms of, um, the totality
and taking into account where there might be regions
or districts that have more pressures
and how we might support those.
Supplementary, then supplementary, Dr.
Vel still got a primary primary, thank you.
Mm-hmm. Let's just move on to the primary,
Primary, Dr.
Vel, I had a supplementary on that, if that was right.
Okay, go for it. You did go. Yes. Thank you so much.
Uh, we've been talking about the pressures that, um,
the workforce is facing
and some of the solutions like training
and recruitment with strike actions happening, um,
for different staffing groups across the country.
What I'm really interested in is
how the staff are actually doing.
Um, so what are the key indicators
of the wellbeing of the staff?
And I know that, um, you did have that
staff engagement survey.
Could you provide an overview on that?
And also some of the issues identified
and the initiatives that you are working on to support staff
to have safe staffing
and to ensure that they, you know,
have good quality of life?
Well, so thank you for the question.
And it goes sort of to the heart
of culture and culture work.
I mean, when we have, uh, industrial action,
I think it's very difficult for everybody involved.
So I wanna acknowledge that on the path of the people
who are taking industrial action
and then the people who are trying to organize services, uh,
without some of their colleagues there,
it's very difficult situation.
And that absolutely impacts on culture.
Uh, and we are concerned about that
and wanting to settle these things as soon
and as fast as we can.
I think then on the culture front, you know,
we have a series of programs trying to develop, including,
uh, leadership development programs
and giving people opportunities for leadership
and development programs.
We also have work going on underway around compassion
and care and how, um, people essentially, uh, need
to reconnect
to the very reason why most people entered healthcare,
which is to care for people
and give people the opportunity to be able to express that
and also to, if they've got concerns, be able
to escalate that as well.
So we have, you know, speaking up programs that,
so people are able to voice those concerns.
Uh, there's expectations too around leadership
and that people are on the floor regularly
and listening to staff and trying to engage
and improve their situation.
And I, I would say that we have thousands of, uh,
managers at that level who are very much engaged
with the welfare of their teams
and staff clinically as well.
There's a, there's absolutely more work to be done on all
of those fronts, but by and large,
and, you know, I try myself to get to the front line
and to hear directly from people, uh,
to hear their concerns.
And I would acknowledge there's absolutely some
difficulties at times and places.
Uh, we were talking about the emergency department
and, uh, we've seen a very significant
pressure on the emergency department.
In fact, the volumes are rising around four to 5% a year.
That is way more than
what we would've expected from population growth.
So we try to respond to those things with a program of work,
which also includes increasing workforce,
but also going in there looking at
how can we make the ED environments better?
Then we have things even like our facilities as well.
So how can we invest in facilities
to make sure the environment is a nicer environment,
a more modern environment, uh, clinical equipment, all
of the things that actually matter, uh, to
how clinicians practice.
We've got work programs.
Or the final thing I'd say is, uh, innovation
and technology has a significant opportunity
to help staff as well.
Uh, I've never seen something spread so quickly in terms
of innovation, but we've put these, uh,
things called these AI scribes, uh, into the hands
of our emergency department clinicians.
We've already gone over 1000, 100
of them using it in more than 20 emergency departments.
Uh, I'm getting people saying,
why can't we all have have these tools?
Uh, but, uh, the tools are partly about how can we
release people's time away from the, you know, the,
the ity of writing notes and things
and speed so they can spend more time caring.
Because it goes back to culture.
I think the more time we can give people to the caring part
of the job, the greater the satisfaction will be.
And so that is about staffing support tools, more staffing
where we have pressure points, absolutely.
But fundamentally, I think it's about developing culture,
uh, within the organization, uh, around, uh, uh, a culture
of compassion and support
for each other and for our patients.
Lemme tree on that. We've got a, I'll let very quick go.
Quick, very quick. And, and, and it's a bit
of a cheeky question really, because Dr.
Bramley, you were known for being, um,
and you alluded you try to get back out on the wards,
but in terms of raising, uh, the morale of clinical staff,
uh, in hospital in particular,
you always go out on the old wards.
You were known for that.
Um, in fact, you had a reputation for it.
'cause I was told times, you always, I, I'm just interested
to know, out of the, the leadership here,
how often are you out on the wards raising
morale just by being there?
I try if I can. I'm not
otherwise some significant situation arises,
which does arise quite often, these roles.
I try to spend part of every Friday, uh, going
and visiting a place, whether it's community hospital,
Maori provider, trying to hear directly about that.
I know a number of the colleagues on the ELT do
exactly the same thing.
And I've also started a program with some
of the colleagues here have already done where I've asked,
uh, at least, uh, two to three times a year, every member
of the executive goes onto a frontline
and joins a frontline job, orderly, cleaner,
whatever it is that they don't have an experience of, uh,
to actually see what it's like for our staff.
Because the risk of an organization of our size
and scale is that you can become very remote.
And so part of this, to your point, uh, this culture is
to actually have our most senior people experience
what is it like to be a cleaner in a hospital
and the pressures of that.
So that's an expectation I've, I've set for the executive,
and I know that they will be doing that
for their own staff as well.
Excellent. Dr. Ferra, thank you.
It was recently reported supplementary, right?
Supplementary? Yeah.
It was recently reported that, uh, cer recruitment
to certain roles at Wellington Hospital can take six months.
And that is confirmed by other information that you released
to me under the Official Information Act as well.
Why are you talking about devolution when the reality is
for workforce, it is highly centrally
controlled in Health New Zealand.
And even if clinicians clinical services have the budget
for new staff, their ability
to recruit is determined centrally.
I think it's partly exactly in, um, response to some
of the needs you're outlining that our view is
that those decisions should be absolutely made locally, uh,
and that people should have the service managers charge.
Nurses have full autonomy over those decisions,
and that's where we are headed.
The caveat is, as per Dr.
Levy's, you have to have budget.
So, uh, if you are working within your budget, uh,
and you have clinical replacement, my view is
that should happen automatically as fast as it can with
as few steps as possible.
We need to get to that place as quickly as possible.
We have had to have a very significant financial turnaround
in the last year, but that is exactly the aim
of the devolution, to get those decisions
as local as possible.
And we've already moved some way this year.
So for example, clinical decisions I see should have nothing
to do with the executive at all.
They all need to be being made those decisions already made
last year to try and push that down.
But the devolution will take it even further.
Say each hospital should have
full autonomy over those things,
But this devolution is a solution to a problem created
by your executive where you centralized the hiring
of staff in the last year.
Uh, I think I would probably go back to
the, the most significant change away from the districts
occurred when Health New Zealand was,
That did not move recruitment out of the districts
that was implemented in the last 18 months.
That centralized a number of our enabling functions,
including the people and culture functions.
And now we are moving those functions
and those staffing as much as we can back
to local districts. This
System of centralized control of recruitment
was implemented in order to get your finances, uh,
to address the financial challenges you faced
in the proceeding year.
And that is all, all being done, uh,
to solve a problem created while you've been enrolled.
Uh, I think there is a very strong expectation
that Health New Zealand will live within the budget, which,
Yes, no one, one's, no one's disagreeing with that.
But it seems like this entire narrative
around evolution either does not exist, uh,
because you, earlier in this session, uh, confirmed
that nothing is changing in the way hospital wards are.
Um, hospital budgets are being run.
And then secondly, the solutions to problems
that have been created under this government.
Uh, well, I, I would respond by saying that
the DHBs were disestablished
and we came with a merger to Health New Zealand.
And with that merger enabling services,
which include people in culture,
we're absolutely centralized into a single national service.
Recruitment decisions. Were not,
We are now devolving that day. Do
You centralize that?
But Dr. Vel, please, let's not jump in on the CI was
trying to answer your question.
And then I would also say, in terms
of living within our means, we have absolutely been trying
to turn that round,
but at the same time, move resources
as much as we can to the front line.
And we are able to definitively say we have lifted the
clinical workforce in every, I shouldn't say every
'cause, there will always be an exception,
but if we look at doctors, nurses,
and allied health, we have lifted the numbers
of the clinical workforce,
and we are continuing to invest within the resources
that we have available to us.
Dr. Bramley, may I ask how, um,
many people you have lifted the
frontline clinical workforce by?
Yes, I gave those, uh, numbers earlier,
but, uh, I will just return to them.
So in the last two years, the the number
of medical FTE has risen
by 6.3% point of
Order, uh, Mr. Chair
point of honor, the, um, CE has already given these,
um, these figures for, for the record,
so they're already been part of our hearing speaker.
That's not a point of, yeah,
Mr. Chair, we've,
we've, we've heard a lot about budget
and living within your, your means. How difficult is, is
This, is this a, is this a question
or a speaking to the point of order?
Because I have asked the question and I wait.
The chief executive has started to, uh, answer. You'll
Remember the answer from last time that was said.
I would like him to reiterate the answer, please.
Oh, are we're just repeating the answer
for the camera? Are we
Point of order, Cameron, I think this is,
I'm concerned that this is becoming a destructive point
of order, um, because you have a,
there has been a question asked
and it's being answered. I'm waiting for the
Answer. Thank you. And
I will also say that raising, um,
trivial points of order is in itself
disorderly under speakers. Rollings
Supplementary when you're ready, Mr.
Chair. Doc Braley.
Uh, thank you. So over the last two years,
we've seen a 6.3% increase in the medical workforce, 12.7
for the nursing workforce, for midwifery 7.1,
and Allied in scientific 12.9.
So across all the main clinical disciplines,
we have seen an increase, and we are doing more to try
and increase those numbers further
as we prioritize the clinical frontline
Supplementary Supplementary andary. Thank
You. We've heard from
yourself and also from Dr.
Shera about, uh, living within budget
and decisions on recruitment being made,
depending on budget.
How difficult has it been to recruit, uh,
with the current funding
that you have been given under this government?
Uh, we received a $1.37 billion uplift, which is,
uh, you know, a very significant budget uplift.
Um, I think more than any other government department,
crown entity, uh, we have seen with our recruitments
that our turnover rates are decreasing, which is very good.
We have not been in that situation for a number of years,
and our vacancy, the numbers
of our vacancies are coming down as well.
So that has all been very good.
As we move forward, uh, into the next few years, we will try
to recruit as many new clinical staff as we can
to the frontline within the budgets that we have.
So why are we still hearing about burnout on the frontline
and why do we still have gaps at Dunedin Hospital Ed
of about, uh, 16 full-time nurses?
And that story is probably all around New Zealand.
Why is what you are saying so disconnected from
what we're hearing on the frontline?
Uh, I don't think it's disconnected.
I think we hear from the frontline directly,
and a lot of our, um, staff are
directly related to the frontline.
We absolutely have areas which are difficult to recruit to,
and we are, they're, especially in specialist services
where it can be hard either for geography or
because of numbers in those specialties
where it can be hard.
But also we are trying to respond to that
by investing in places like the emergency department
with things like the ED boost,
which we announced a few months ago,
which was a $20 million investment, including trying
to get additional staff into our emergency departments.
Supplementary Cameron Luton, thank you. Chair.
Yeah, Sorry. Just, um, perhaps
to add a point in relation to, uh, agreement
with NZDO on ratios and CCDM.
So that is something we are actively working with them on,
and that's an important part of, um,
our work with the unions.
Uh, there are, um, I guess a combination
of issues when we are thinking about how to fill rosters
and recruit, and that's a combination of skill mix.
Uh, and as we emerge different roles
and different departments have different needs.
That's an ongoing conversation.
Uh, CCDM has been in place for over 20 years,
and so we are looking to refresh how we do that
and we're working actively
with the union on, on that process.
Cameron, uh, thank you.
I'm just hoping to explore, uh, how devolving, uh,
to, you know, to more local, uh, groups for hiring and,
and staffing and recruitment.
How that's actually functioning in,
in this recruitment phase that you, you're going through
or how it has contributed to what you've achieved.
So, uh, in terms of the total numbers of vacancies
that we see, we are at a three to four year low.
So it is very pleasing.
It means that those vacancies, uh,
that are there are being filled, uh, because as I said
before, that there can be some, a number of places
where it's very hard to recruit to those numbers
of places are coming down.
So for example, in mental health, our vacancy rates,
which been historically highly coming down, so
that's happening in a number of places.
So that's very pleasing.
And as part of devolution, that's very much about local
services, making those decisions, uh,
and us trying to enable that as much as we can.
So do you, so you think that, uh,
the devolution has been a positive
or a negative to filling those spaces?
Uh, I think it'll be a positive
because it's trying to get as much decision making back
to local places as possible.
I've got from Jenny Markoff, just,
Just, um, you talked about, um,
retention in that workforce.
So previously, a number of years ago, we heard about a lot
of, you know, nurses heading off overseas.
What can you speak to in terms of the retention
of the workforce, the medical workforce?
So I have the figures for, uh,
the annual turnover.
So for nursing, uh,
when Health New Zealand was formed in 2022,
our turnover annual turnover rate was 14.4%.
Uh, currently we are down to 8.2%, so, uh,
nearly halved.
Uh, so that's very pleasing.
Uh, for senior medical offices, it was 6.1 back in 2022,
we're at 5.2.
Now. Uh, some areas such as Allied and Scientific,
because, uh, there's a lot
of different Allied Scientific groupings, some
of which can be very hard to recruit to.
Uh, we were at 15.4, we're down to 10.
So in that sense, uh,
although people can absolutely feel the pressure
of a individual vacancy in a specialty area
or in a specific place, we are seeing them decline, uh,
to now being at historic lows
in ation of Health New Zealand. Sorry,
Can I just ask for clarification, the 14%, is
that total turnover, was that for nurses?
Uh, the 14.4 was the annual
turnover rate in the march.
Yeah, so it was, that was in 2022 down to 8.2.
Now, I would just say if you were a service
and you still had a vacancy,
you would still very much feel that.
But I'm saying it's over time that level of vacancy
and turnover is reducing
With those improved retention rates quite set for me.
Um, um, with those improved retention rates, what,
what do you attribute that to?
What are the, what are the key things
that Health New Zealand is, is doing differently
to bring all of those, um, numbers leaving down?
Well, I think it goes back to some
of the earlier discussion that, you know, um, a lot
of people who train in health want to be able
to deliver good care to their, um, patients
or if they're not patient, patient to, uh, wherever they are
and being given those opportunities to be able to do,
that's really important.
Uh, the, the other part of that is, uh, recruitment efforts,
although we've heard there's some difficulties,
and I acknowledge there are, there are also some successes,
uh, including in places like where we've got it down from 40
to 50 to under 30 now.
So we have dedicated focus on specific areas to try
and improve where we know we need to improve.
I think we've got that. And then I think, um, the,
the bottom line is that, um, a lot of people do want
to work in healthcare, uh,
and it's, it is despite its challenging, um, challenges, uh,
and an appealing place for people to be able to work.
One of the issues I had heard previously is people felt
frustrated because they couldn't feed back improvements.
Do you think the regional structure will help that
to allow the frontline staff to be able to feedback
and end up having greater job satisfaction?
Yes. And, uh, in particular, not just
that regional part of that,
very much the district part of that.
So, um, we have people called, uh, GDO is the,
the group managers of the hospitals.
So the people who run the hospitals
with their clinical teams, uh, uh, part
of this devolution process will be trying to get
as much decision making
and support to enter their hands as possible.
Excellent. Thank you. I think just on that, if I can add,
the region is about coordination, uh, the district
or even, uh, lower level than that is about the delivery.
So our, um, destination
in devolution isn't just the region, it's
as far as we can get.
So when the decision closest to the action,
and we believe that will unshackle local knowledge
and local social capital,
and that's what the evidence shows
where improvement actually occurs.
So that's what we're trying to actually achieve here.
The region is more around the coordination
and we see good, uh, results around that
is working together to have regional solutions.
Primary. Dr. Vera. Thank you.
I asked, uh, 58 written parliamentary questions
to different government, uh, departments and crown entities
and 50 have replied.
All of them have a Chief financial officer
who has an a chartered accountant patient, uh,
except for four.
Uh, and they're very small entities.
The IPCA, the Criminal Cases Review Commission,
the Classifications office, and the Law Commission.
Health New Zealand is our largest CR crown entity
by quite a stretch in terms of the size of its budget.
Why is your chief financial officer not
a chartered accountant,
and what are the, um, uh, what are the risks with
that situation
Looking you to come forward?
Thank you. That was an extensive recruitment process,
Mostly to the microphone.
There was an extensive recruitment process undertaken.
Uh, there's a wide range of skills that are required
for an organization of our size.
And as part of that recruitment process,
we had chartered accountants
and we had people like that were not chartered accountants,
but had had a very extensive expertise
and a long track record of being, um,
in a senior CFO leadership of
a very large listed company in New Zealand
and had developed a wide range of skills as being part of
that, uh, CFO of that listed company.
Health New Zealand's financial, um, team has made up of a,
a large group of people, um, the right from the chair
of the audit committee, um,
the extensive expertise on the audit committee, uh,
from professors of, uh, accounting, uh, myself, um,
ex, uh, PWC, uh, uh, uh,
directors and, uh, partners.
And there's a very wide team
of accountants right through South New Zealand.
So I look at it as a team of people, um,
and, uh, led by Bevin, who is a,
not a charter accountant you say,
but has had extensive experience leading one
of the largest listed companies in New Zealand.
Hi, my question is not about the skills of the individual
or, uh, why is Health New Zealand so different
from the 50 other, uh,
crown entities and government departments
that this arrangement is used in Health New Zealand
and not in those other departments?
The CFO has a wide range of roles
inside Health New Zealand,
and it's certainly a large organization in terms of, uh,
dollars turnover,
but it's also significant in terms of its, um,
HR resources, data and digital
and all sorts infrastructure,
which the CFO is also responsible for.
And so needs to bring a wide range of skills
and experience to cover those roles.
On the specific, um, issue of the chartered accountant
qualification, though that, uh, as, um, any of us know
as members of professional groups brings additional ethical
obligations as as well, are you concerned
that those obligations don't sit on someone
who doesn't have a chartered accountant qualification?
Um, I'm very confident as the boards
and, uh, the CFO's wide range
of experience in reporting through to, um,
stock exchanges listed co uh, listed company.
And as I said, there's also a team which is, uh, managed
with a very strong audit committee,
which has extensive accounting experience on it.
And so I think there's significant checks
and balances to ensure
that those accountant skills are covered.
In terms of the, uh, it's, this
Question is not about the skills, it's about the
obligations of a chartered accounting
And the, and the obligations and the experience
Supplement. I,
I, I could add that, um, Bevin has, uh, many people
who report to him who are chartered accountants
and Bevin's responsibilities are only not financial.
Here's a number of areas of responsibility
that reporting team, including infrastructure, data
and digital remarks.
Uh, he's got a broader responsibility.
Uh, repo reporting to him are a number of people,
significant number who are all chartered account. Yeah.
Can you explain
supplementary go to you and then I'll come to you.
Thank you. The, um, can you describe the, uh,
governance arrangements at the time that the decision
to appoint a non, uh, uh, chartered accountant
to this role was made?
IE was it the commissioners or the, or the board,
and how those people, uh, made, uh,
evaluated this issue at the time?
Well, the, the, um, appointment at the time was led
by Margie Apa, who was the chief executive at the time,
and there was a selection panel put in place
and the selection panel made the appointment,
Except Dr. Campbell, the chief financial officer
of very complex organization like Health New Zealand,
has a large team that they have to oversee and manage.
Can you tell us what the ft e the financial, uh, team,
Uh, Total finance team is about 850
people in South New Zealand.
Excellent. And would you consider your role
to be overseeing the, the them
and the work that they've put out?
Absolutely. And as both Dr. Levy
and Roger have mentioned, beyond that,
they're the infrastructure, digital
and procurement, uh, teams as well. Yes.
Excellent. Thank you. Can You just flip the
microphone around, but just,
So I would just make point that, uh, the role that the
is currently in is, uh, very wide
and includes those other significant disciplines
for Health New Zealand, uh, infrastructure,
which is a multi billion dollar spend, obviously,
and also our digital systems as well.
Uh, and then he has high degrees of expertise in each
of those areas, uh, reporting to him.
Um, in terms of the executive as well, I, I I regard that,
uh, all members of the executive, um, do
and should be held accountable for their actions
and that we have governance
and executive committees, uh, in place around that
for reporting systems, including for, uh, finance
to our FRAC committee for finance risk audit committees.
Uh, and so we try to make sure you have multiple layers
of reporting systems
and accountability mechanisms within Health New Zealand.
Thank you. We, uh, we've reached 1245 makes.
It's time for lunch. Thank you everyone.
We will suspend until one 30
and then we will move on to, uh, key service areas,
performance and challenges, thank to
Right Cherry's up there.
You
so Thank you.
We rolling. So you just, how are you going?
Actually love a cherry. A cherry. I'm very well, thank you.
How you go? One of my favorites. Pretty good.
Gorgeous. Did you get them?
Thank you.
Alright. All right. Welcome back
everybody. We now move on
To the next part of our structured agenda, which is
around key service areas, challenges.
So this covers hospital and specialist services, primary
and community care, mental health, um, and other output
and service areas like public health
and holder Maori services.
Do any members have questions?
I'd hate to move on to the next section.
Yes, I could ask a question. Dr.
Can, um, pick up the point about primary and community care?
What efforts have been made to quantify the, um,
vacancies in the, uh, workforce gaps in the primary
and community parts of the, uh, sector?
Uh, thank you for that question.
I, there's a number of, um, areas that we're working
through, mainly in the primary community
through the primary care tactical action plan,
which is looking at the additional 400 nurses into primary
care a hundred nz uh, additional NZ docs.
Um, by October next year that's starting
training program from now until October next year,
we have the 15 New Zealand trained doctors pathway that's,
uh, being worked on at the moment to start
through next year.
Also, the additional training for nurse practitioners
and advanced training for nurses within primary care
Ary. Uh,
where is the primary care Tactical Action
Plan published?
Uh, and why does your webpage say it's under construction
when it has, has been repeatedly referenced in, um,
ministerial and Health New Zealand comment.
Oh, apologies. So I'll have to look at that for you
and, uh, we can get that up on the website.
That would be fantastic.
'cause I did search, uh, extensively for it.
So perhaps, given that it's the subject of
so much discussion and yet not published,
could you tell us what's in it?
Oh, sure. Um, so we have, um, places
for 400 new grad nurses within primary care.
There is, um, a hundred New Zealand trained, uh, sorry,
New Zealand NZ Recs doctors, um, places
to start over the next 18 months
that's starting their training.
There's an additional 50 New Zealand new
grad, um, doctor pathway.
Uh, that's to sort of, uh, start next year.
We have a hundred
and, um, 80 advanced nurse training positions,
plus 120 nurse practitioner training.
Does it or, uh, for nurses to work
through their nurse practitioner qualifications.
Um, is the primary care tactical action plan
only about workforce or also about
how carers delivered in in the primary community sector?
Uh, so it's, it's also got a further component.
So under the whole action plan, this component on workforce
and then the additional rollout of the urgent
after hours over the next two years,
that's included under that as well.
Um, oh,
the medicine prescribing, oh, sorry.
The 12 month scribing, so the additional 12 month, um,
change in the prescribing.
Okay. Um, the relativities
and pay between the hospital and the community sector.
It's argued that the lack, that the lower rates
of pay in parts of the community sector makes it harder
to fill vacancies.
Is there any work on pay parity underway by the government?
I can't make a comment on the government, but, um, as Dr.
Bramley made the point previously
around funding into the primary care sector, it has been a
priority in this round of funding going out.
As you, as it's been mentioned, it's been the highest
increase over the last, um, number
of years going into primary communities, sorry,
in the general practice as an uplift,
recognizing the importance of the sector.
Dr. Bramley, previously you mentioned all aligning.
Uh, can you please explain what all aligning is
and what the, uh, value you see in it for the health system?
Yes, sure. So, um,
What I'm particularly keen to have
restored is the,
and it's not lost in every place by the way.
So, um, is the relationships collegiality the way
of bringing both primary
and hospital doctors together, uh, in a systematic way, uh,
to focus on joint priorities
and then also, um, at a very basic level for people to get
to know each other, uh, as well.
And when we've seen that working previously in the past, um,
it has very much been about, um,
if you're a gp, who do you refer to?
And if you are the receiver,
knowing your colleagues in primary care,
but then also what are the issues that might be affecting
that flow of information or the flow of patients
or clinical issues.
And then creating forums, uh, that are based
around the concentration of the, the referring pathways,
which is usually, uh, the hospital as the bedrock of that
with its primary care practices as well,
and creating the ability to network
and bring those things together in a,
in a organ very organized way up and down the country.
Uh, Dr. Sullivan is overseeing. Do
You want come forward or that work program
as we develop that up?
Um, do you want to add Richard?
Yeah, so, um, as, uh, Dale mentioned, we're sort of, um,
working with, um, sort of primary care clinicians about, uh,
joint terms of reference across the country
because it's an opportunity not only to build relationships,
but equally to look at those kind of key, um, I guess areas
of tension and, and that may require investment.
And so that, that as a provider we can kind of understand
that, um, health pathways, which you're possibly aware of,
which is a, that kind of primary
care pathway into secondary care.
Um, so a lot of that stuff is, is now mentioned, used
to exist back in the world of dps.
Um, and it variably exists now.
So some places have held onto those relationships,
but many have let them drift.
And so wanting to get some consistency back,
but equally, um, you know, the opportunity
to have a joint kind of, you know, what is the purpose
of these groups and how are they gonna really function?
How are they gonna make a difference to the health system?
So my, um, other supplementaries are directed at trying
to understand what this concept can,
um, actually assist with.
Uh, is it, uh, we hear, um,
on this committee a lot about the opportunities
of new models of care of moving care out
of the hospital into the community.
Are they a vehicle for achieving that change or not?
This is the discussion
we're having around the terms of reference.
Um, so some of the things completely really,
I say simple, they're not simple.
So for instance, someone orders a blood test,
who's responsible for that blood test?
You know, people when they gets sent out, um, you know,
the patient goes back to the community.
Is the ordering clinician from the hospital responsible
or is it, is it the, um, the primary care practitioner?
And so we've done a lot of work trying to get a sort
of standard protocols and policies around areas like that.
But we absolutely see the opportunity, uh, to your point
around, uh, the shifting of models.
Now that's also a clinical network opportunity as well.
So there's a, um,
kind networks which also have primary care members on them
is looking at the different ways you can deliver services.
So, uh, but we haven't, we are still, um, I guess solving
that question you're asking.
I've got, I've got a bunch of others, but
I've got others. Yeah, of course
I can I just directly on,
Oh Well I'm stopping on that too.
Um, But ly specifically and then to you
Hamish, thank you. She was on
me first. Recently the minister announced a, um,
primary care advisory group.
Um, how do you think that group will help with the program
of work you've got with with primary care?
Yes, sorry. Um, so thank question,
but the minister's looking about how do we work closer
with the primary care
and the clinical, uh, sorry, clinical frontline,
um, positions within the sector.
So that's one mechanism to have discussions.
Um, through that network we work heavily, uh,
along other networks and the, our role, um, uh, GP networks
and our P hos
and a number of areas to improve our models of care, work
with them about the integration,
our services all aligning is one of those frameworks
where have their clinical, their clinical aligning.
And then we have the wider all aligning, which is about
can we look at referral pathways?
Can we look at, um,
hospital avoidance or hospital of discharge?
But that also incorporates larger components of the sector.
So our home-based, uh, for example, residential care
I have further, but I can take them later ish.
Are you looking at models, something like, um,
the community rehabilitation enablement, um,
and support team that we had probably in Christchurch,
the Crest model, uh, to look at kind of more widely across,
um, rehabilitation rather than maybe clinical networks,
which I know there's been a number of
pathways including C-C-O-P-D.
Are you looking more widely kind of the integration
of primary healthcare?
With our, with our hospitals,
I look absolutely. So
the Crest model
and there's the start model and the white cat as well.
So they're very similar about rehab approaches.
They're aimed at how do we do supportive discharge?
So how do we get patients out into our community,
to communities or into agential care as quick as we can
and are seamless way also about
how do we support people in their own homes
around allied health and other work programs
or supportive mechanisms in those models of care.
So absolutely, it's one of the work programs.
Our priming community teams or planning
and funding teams through the regions are working together
around those models of care, looking at case mix mod models
of implementation and home-based.
'cause what we've seen over the years is the acuity
of those people living in their homes has risen
and we need to adapt our models of care to support those.
Can I please add to that,
which is not necessarily strictly the primary care,
but the kinda the models question.
So we're looking quite a lot of, um,
I guess alternative workforce solutions.
Uh, so audiologists, um,
undertaking first specialist appointments.
Now we're doing that initially in a secondary care kind
of setting, but you could see how you could take
that into primary care over time.
Um, Dr. Conley mentioned earlier, uh, the work we've done
with, um, the ophthalmologists
and the optometrists around the follow up of,
of post cataract surgery.
We're also doing the same with orthotists around squints
for our children, um, to look at how that model could look.
And then the other area, which we think is a huge
opportunity, um, but work to do is around
what we call the musculoskeletal pathway.
So people who have back pain, hip pain, shoulder pain, uh,
you know, what is the model in, in that space.
And use advanced physios.
Again, at the moment, we're looking at that very much
through a secondary care lens,
but the intention is to then take
that into a primary care setting.
Excellent. Okay. Dr. Vera,
I just noticed in those answers, uh, that there was,
it's not certain that, uh, the model of care
work would necessarily be part of the ing.
It might be focused more on
a more narrow focus on relationships.
So notice that, that that's, that was your previous answer,
and that in the, um, you've also cast forward to
what could be achieved.
Uh, our committee will hear from you
next year and the year after.
What is a realistic expectation in terms
of seeing these models of care, um, the opportunities
by new models of care actually being, uh, delivered, um,
in terms of how many years out
and the scale of what's achievable.
This was one of the big promises of the reform.
It's really enabled by technology. Everyone wants to do it.
Yeah. And no, great question.
And something that we discussed in debate a lot,
as you could imagine, um, if I take the, um,
ophthalmology pathway as an example, so we actually, uh,
this is getting to detail,
but at the historically, you know,
I think it's about 23,000 patients
who have cataract surgery per year.
Um, all of those patients who have been, you know,
contacted the day after surgery
and then a month later being seen by, by a specialist, um,
the, the, the day one, um, follow up now doesn't happen.
Uh, the patient's given an SOS so a phone number
to call that got concerns.
Um, that's for about 60% of people
who have that cataract surgery.
Uh, so 40% still need to be seen
because it's more complicated, um, uh, surgery.
And this has been a very clinically led piece of work.
And then the one month, uh, follow up.
So we're just in the process now of, of looking to contract
that into, into community.
So we're doing that as we speak.
Um, and we have, uh, we've, uh,
agreed on your optis pathway.
So that's, again, a clinically led piece of work.
Um, so in a year's time,
I think we could confidently say we've implemented
the ophthalmology pathway.
Um, and that, and actually what that does,
and it'll be interesting to see, um, you know,
what the number lands,
but we're predicting between 200, 2.3, 2,500 extra if says,
will be achieved by this model.
So our specialists will be able to see another two to two
and half thousand extra patients
because of the change shift in model.
Um, so I think some of those things we should be able
to come back to you and say, yes, that has worked.
Um, uh, the MSKI, uh, we've recently appointed, uh,
or fact regard to complete the appointment of 17.6 FTE
advanced physios into the system.
Um, so again, the shift to model, we're capturing
that data regularly, so we should be able to feed
that information back to you as well. So
The promise is so great.
You know, the, like that, that's a great example.
What you've, what you've given, and yet the need is so high.
'cause there's, people aren't getting, uh,
the care they need on time.
Um, there's unmet need.
The community and the emergency departments
are overcrowded, you know, the problem.
So shouldn't we take all these opportunities?
How do you get to a point?
What, what do you need to get to a point where the scale
of these types of changes are enough to
impact the big problems we have in the health system?
Um, yeah. So look, all of the things
to your point I'm talking about are, um,
are small increments rather than massive,
you know, scale change.
Um, we are exploring, uh, what we're calling regional,
uh, hubs.
So they're kind of a, an opportunity
for people to refer into.
We're looking at trying to, what we're moving to, um,
what we call clinical utilization criteria.
So we historically,
and so this is kind of, uh,
hopefully I'll try make this make sense,
but we used to use what's called CPA scoring.
Uh, we still do use CPAC scoring in a lot of our session.
My question is more about the scale of this type
of change, and are you constrained by the number of
like management bandwidth or budget or technology
or what, why can't we do even more of this great stuff? Um,
I, I think my honest answer to
that would be clinical change is tough.
Um, uh, so making sure that it's, uh, clinically safe,
you know, you've got the right quality systems around it,
and that the clinicians shifting from a, um,
respectfully a kind of a, a doctor driven model to an a sort
of a more interprofessional driven model takes time.
So I think there's some real constraints in that space.
Um, uh, look, I think change is hard in the health system.
Um, I think there's always an opportunity
for more change investment, um, where, you know,
the change is gonna make a difference,
But the hardness is currently falling just on the eye, um,
folk, so to speak.
And then there's a, a whole cl uh, slew of other specialties
and patient groups waiting for
that investment in modernization
of their systems as as well.
So I would, um, supplement that by saying that
if you find the right innovation,
um, that is responding to a really significant need,
um, I've been very surprised at the speed of the uptake.
So when it comes to a very traditional model
and changing it from FSAs to alternative workforce,
and you need to have the other workforce ready,
you need the, uh, clinical support
for the change in the model.
Uh, and that can take significant time.
On the other hand, I mentioned the uptake of these, um,
ambient scribes and the tools in ED
where we've had exactly the opposite issue, uh,
flutter requests, and now we have thousands
of people wanting to use that all in this space of months.
What we have, uh, launched is a project called healthx,
which is trying to identify those innovations
that, uh, we are not inventing, um,
that might be in some other system already up
and being used.
And is there an opportunity for rapid adoption of those
because they're already clinically
tested and we know they work.
So coming into that suite, the one we're working on
at the moment is, for example, up titration,
up titration of, um,
congestive heart failure meds using technology
monitoring in people's home.
Instead of being, needing to be done in, um,
health facilities that looks like
it's gonna have rapid uptake.
Same with the use of some AI tools in radiology
where a number of radiologists are already using those.
Then it becomes how can we enable a more rapid uptake
of a change in practice that is occurring.
So that healthx program we're sponsoring is trying to say,
what does that look like already underway
or what, who's doing what overseas?
And we've made contact to with the NHS, uh,
because, um, many health systems are thinking about this
exact same issue.
And so we've asked them if they will share with us
what they have done, and they've very generously shared some
of that with us and trying to create connections
so we can see those things which are moving within
inside public health systems already.
And then can we adopt them?
Because I think if you pick the right thing, um,
then it's us sort of accelerating it rather than trying
to be the lead of the model change, we then become the sort
of a supporter of the change.
Yeah. So I think there's a bit
of a dynamic about both those things
going on at the same time. Thank
You. Two more, uh,
supplementaries to clarify this further.
Um, what is the alliance as a structure
and how does it re relate to the existing
PHO structure and
Yeah. Look, I, I think
alliances take a wide abuse.
We have the p os as a, a mechanism that we work with
around general practice.
Licensing does go a wee bit further.
We would like to include our pharmacy partners,
our home base, our arc partners.
So then we're looking at this system.
I think to your point about how quickly
and how can we move our services in models of care forward,
um, we do need to take them bite size it one.
'cause every time you touch one part of sectors, you know,
in health, you can have causal effects
or unintended consequences in another part.
So our roll through those laning frameworks, working
with each of our sectors just
to ensure when we make a decision
or a change to model of care,
we don't have unintended consequences, but to our hospitals
or from our hospitals back into our primary.
And that's a network I see sort of delivering those types
of conversations and models.
Okay. So it sounds like a comprehensive primary care Yes.
Network is what the alliance is.
So then, um, what is the relationship
between the Iwi Maori partnership board and the Alliance?
Oh, look, I'd see, um, them as a key partner in any,
anything we do in our communities.
The communities that are sort of the,
the fundamental to the models of care.
They're the voice we need to hear from,
make sure it's working, um,
and bring those voices through into alliance and frameworks
and, um, might be able to touch a bit later on those as well
as part of your IPPs,
Uh, to be just, you're,
you're still clarifying the scope of your work? Yes,
Correct. Yeah.
I Doc, sorry. Just add, think to Dr.
Graham's comment before we used to have these in place
and we've lost some of these connects.
We need to learn from how those worked previously
and what we're starting to now.
Sorry, excuse me. What we're starting
to do now is bringing those back in
place over the next 12 months,
Primary Pam Campbell.
Excellent. Brilliant. Um,
can you give us an update on the new urgent
and art, uh, care services?
Yes. So as announced by the minister, we've got
around 70 locations over the next two years to roll out.
Um, and there's a planned roll out of each
of those sites over that two years.
Um, we're on track to deliver those.
Um, probably one of the things we need to work
through over the next two years of workforce issues
that we've previously talked to is,
as those sites are either extended in ours during the day
or extended the days,
they provide those services throughout the different, um,
rural and urban locations in New Zealand.
We just need to be working with those areas,
with those practices
and other services that support them, like St.
John's for an example, about how do those workforces
and how do we, um, extend those hours or that weekdays.
Hmm. Um, and I think in one of the previous answers,
it was said that this has been a four
to 5% increase in our presentations in the ED department,
and that's continuing to increase.
Do you see, um, this as a, as a way
to actually reduce the pressure on our ed,
um, eds around the country?
Yeah, look, absolutely.
Um, along with the, um, 24 7 digital service as well,
that was released in July, we're seeing that, um, uptake
of about 45,000 people have used that service since the, um,
we sort of soft launched
that at the beginning of July this year.
We see that as, um, a tool alongside face-to-face services
to take those pressures off their ED services.
Mm. Ed departments.
Yeah. Would you, would you also see those digital
services taking off pressure off some GP practices?
Do you have, um, any information on the share of GP
practices that are open to new patients?
Uh, look, we're seeing, so just the first question.
Absolutely. We see the 24 7 as a complimentary service
to our gps.
Our main goal is
to have our population enrolled in GP practices.
But we know depending on where you live, rural, urban,
that sometimes it is difficult
to either get those appointments or in a timely manner.
The 24 7 provides an alternate option,
and we've seen that type of uptake for the reasoning
of use service.
Um, and what we are seeing is a start
to see a slight uptick in general practices with open box.
It is slight, but it's positive in the sense we are starting
to see more general practices with open box.
Um, just supplementary.
Do, do you think, um, the biggest barrier to, um, GP
practices open, uh, being able
to take on more patients is not actually the number
of GP practices rather actually a workforce workforce
Issue? Yeah,
absolutely. I think where we see, um,
pressure points in communities, it'll be out the workforce.
Rural communities, urban communities is a workforce issue.
Thank you. Right. Supplementary, supplementary,
Ricardo, what feedback have you received, um, from
GP own clinics in relationship
to potential changes in ownership models
and whether those could impact connections to the community
or delivery of service?
Um, look, like all of our funded sector,
we work in an environment where we contract
with the private sector
and they have different operating models
and different ownership models.
We have guardrails in the way we contract working through,
for example, general practice through the p os
or directly with GP practices.
So our role is to work with the sector
and just ensure that the services that we need
for the general practice
or the p hos to provide
that they're providing to our communities.
But we need to do that with all
of our funded sector partners, pharmacy, age care,
home-based, so our roles to work
with all sorts of ownership.
But so feedback that you've received, I mean from, say,
GP on clinics, like are there any concerns
that have been expressed around, um, the changing makeup
of ownership of, uh, primary care?
I haven't had any direct feedback from, uh,
a GP practice directly.
No, very much so. Hang
On up on that.
You do too. Sorry, I've got Jenny first.
Thank, thank you. Just so supplementary on that.
Um, I think you are talking to corporatization model
of primary care.
Indeed. Uh, have you any concerns
that that could that could develop into, um,
international companies wanting to buy our general practice?
Um, and what are the regulatory barriers
that would stop that or enable that?
Um, in relation to concerns?
Just coming back to my point, we contract now with the range
of community providers with different ownership models,
different structures, public, private sort of entity.
Um, so as I said, I just come back to our core role
as House New Zealanders to work with those providers, ensure
that they're providing service to the communities
for which we are funding them for
and for which they should be providing to those communities.
And the guardrails and the contracting frameworks.
We have monitoring frameworks,
but also they're also partners.
I mean, one of the things we need to look in the funded
sector around our community
and our hospitals is we need to work
with our providers for our communities.
'cause we want services closer to home.
We want be able to provide them in way
that people can access easily.
Obviously there's constraints of which we can do that,
but the models of ownership, we sort of work
with the providers and the services
of which we need them to provide.
So I was speaking particularly about an international
company wanting to come into New Zealand.
Um, maybe a private equity firm
or something like that where there are regulatory barriers.
That, that's what I was asking.
Do you have any concerns around that?
Uh, look, the honest one don't
have a formed opinion on the overseas purchasing of those.
We know we have them through our laboratory providers now.
We work with those lab providers
that have different operating models
or different ownership models.
So we have that in the market now.
We have that as in our funded sector.
And we work with them around, as I said, those services
that we need to purchase and want them to provide.
I think where we would have concern is if we saw clinical
outcomes being affected, uh,
or if we had expectations of service delivery
that those services wouldn't be.
And that would be regardless obviously of whatever
that ownership model was.
But we are very much focused on the outcomes
and the patient satisfaction as well, uh,
that would occur with service.
There are a number of corporate providers
around now, we know that.
Um, are you seeing better
or worsening patient outcomes
as from those corporate providers?
We're on urgent care, eh, Primary care
We have moved a bit.
I think if, um, if we look at our annual report, um,
around patient's involvement to their care
and the satisfaction of that, we are seeing that increasing.
Um, the, uh, sort of stats
that are include in annual report sort of point to
through general practice.
Um, those contacts
and patients feeling like they're involved in their care
and how they're treated through there
is seeing an improvement, which for us goes to the sort
of patient-centered environment and clinical outcome,
Perhaps supplement from Isha and then ish,
Uh, primary about urgent care.
Um, thank you for publishing your urgent acute care.
Um, after US care plan on the internet on page 11,
there's this diagram that I believe is trying
to communicate that whether you're in a large urban service,
a provincial city, a rural center,
or remote, you'll have consistent urgent care services
elsewhere in the document within one hour of your, your home
for clinical capabilities, radiology access, laboratory
pharmacy, and um, uh, use
of shared ca care records and notes.
Is that vision being delivered by this plan?
Is, is that the goal? That is
The goal. Did I understand
correctly
that you said this is a two year program of work?
Uh, yes. So over between Jan
and June, uh, this 26, 27 and 27, 28.
So the, and,
and then every one of these places that are within one hour
of where 98% of New Zealanders live have,
have this level of service,
Will have a level of service,
Correct. Yeah. But it,
like, there will be a pharmacy available for
after hour for anywhere that these
after hours medical, there'll also be a pharmacy. Yeah,
There'll be, the model here will be different depending on
where you live in access to that.
Yeah. Will be different depending on the location.
And is this plan fully funded?
Yes, it is. Thank you.
Seeing this involved, um, also questions about, uh,
the um, uh, provider ownership structure.
Could you just return to the comment made by my colleague?
Is there any regulatory barriers to a, um,
private equity firm buying, uh, primary care practices, uh,
general practice practices?
Look, I'd have to come back to the committee.
I'm not aware that it's about the, any regulatory barriers.
I'd have to come back to the committee in writing
Campbell. Sorry.
Excellent. Um, and I appreciate Mr.
Chair, we might have strayed off the primary,
primary question.
Um, um, what role do you see something like
community, community pharmacies playing in,
taking the pressure off our gps, um,
with maybe broadening their scope of practice
and what, what's, what's that looking like?
And I suppose, is there any change
that funding would be required for such changes?
Look, that's a really good question.
So we, we see community pharmacy a key, a key enabler
to frontline services to our communities.
And part of our discussions through, um,
our pharmacy negotiation group this year is about
how we can expand the services
that they provide to our communities.
And there are a number of pilots throughout the country at
the moment that we can learn from about how they're doing.
And we'll use the language minor ailments.
So if you go in there for, you know, eyes
or throats that the pharmacy can provide sort
of an extended, um, consultation for you.
So there are, as I said, there's a number of, um,
different service models throughout the country.
We're working with our pharmacy, um, nets works
during this year to look at what additional services
they could provide to take pressure
off the general practices.
Like to Can stop
Stop on that. Yeah. Yeah. Stop.
So, so beyond just pharmacy, obviously,
um, you know, as we get out
and about around the community, I've been visiting various
general practices Yes.
In KA and they have a practice which includes, um,
having paramedic, I've been out to Canons Creek.
They include paramedic and,
and a social team as well to, to do that sort of, um,
work in the community to, to get people to come and, and,
and see their doctor or get their child or whatever.
Um, those models are the models,
which I think probably are the future way that, um,
primary care needs to work.
That's expanded scope.
Um, is that what the kind of model that
that Health New Zealand is, is looking at?
How do we roll that out, fund that, um,
Ab Absolutely. And we're
running six, six pilot sites
around the country at the moment in some
of our remote rural areas.
To your point, working with St.
John's where we are, the paramedics not out,
they're working in the general practice providing services
in their allied health staff, working within practices
to provide a wider scope of service.
So your, your point's absolutely correct.
We need to look at how our general practices, um, work
with additional, um, allied health staff.
Our paramedics through, um, St.
John's we're appropriate and we're available, um,
our pharmacy providers exactly that, to
how do we get a connected system
to provide those services in our commun communities. And
Just funding question.
Following on from that, how does that, you know,
if we are having those kinds of practices with
that expanded scope with all those various, um,
components in it, how does the capitation
model then fit that?
Or is that the thing that needs to change for the funding?
Yes, absolutely. As we develop these models of care
and extended scopes practice, we'll need to look at
how the funding models work.
So as any health system around the country,
there's two components We need to look at.
Those that are non fund non don't require money,
but we just become more efficient
or we look at models of care and the way we operate
and connect those services to be more efficient.
And then the funding models that we need to look at
and how do we appropriately do that?
So this is a non-financial
and financial component to anything health does.
Yeah. And we should always look at both components of those.
Yeah. Could I just add
that really this is really important as this develops
because one of the problems we're not performing well on ash
rates, ambulatory sense of hospitalization.
So we've too many people in hospital, it shouldn't be.
Well, if we have these kind of models, um,
more ubiquitous in our system, we will be able
to do better on ash rates.
And this interprofessional practice is really
important in that regard.
And that'll in itself take a
further pressure of the hospital.
So I mean, you see from all of these things,
they all interconnected. Yeah.
And it's also bringing point of care testing into some
of the general practices as well in more remote places
so they can do it on site, which is adding,
so people don't have to travel. Dr. Fair,
I'd like to return to the comment, um, that the way you,
uh, guarding, uh, that the monitoring of providers,
um, is what is the safeguard, um, with corporate, uh,
providers of primary care services?
Can you explain what is measured that gives you
that information in general practice?
Yes. So we have a number of clinical indicators which we,
um, measuring regularly and also reporting on.
So, uh, things like vaccination rates, uh,
screening coverage programs, many of which are delivered
by primary care ambulatory sensitive hospitalizations.
Um, the ability, uh,
when people from the various surveys need to access care,
uh, they able to access care
and, um,
Jason was just saying we've just seen it's just going from
over 77.2 to 77.9, which isn't a big jump,
but it does mean that access is not deteriorating.
And we can also see, uh, the numbers
of interactions that are going on
and where they're going on.
And so we can see that across the country.
So that's a sort of a measure.
We can see very much access measures.
Are people able to access
their services and are they improving?
And then we also get some feedback from surveys such
as from the Health Quality
and Safety Commission, which talks about the satisfaction
that people have with care, understand,
including their engagement.
Were they happy, uh, that, you know,
were they involved in decision
making, those sorts of questions.
Thank you. So the, um, the point is about particular, uh,
providers though, and it could be
that you might have a consistent
or even improving national average
and there could be a provider
that is really under surfacing.
Um, do you measure that those at the provider level?
Yes. We, we do measure those at the provider level as well
as geographic spread as well.
But, so if we saw a particular issue with the provider, uh,
we would be engaging through the planning
and funding team with that provider about
what was going on there
and we'd, we would view that as part
of the regular program management as it were,
of our planning and funding teams with those providers.
Have you ever, um, uh, got to the stage of,
um, uh, to what level do you get to
with providers when there is under, under servicing?
Are they always able to fix it
or do people lose their ability to get capitation funds?
Uh, well the simple answer is we have had
some issues in recent times with some providers
and, uh, non-delivery of what we expected those,
um, service lines to be.
We have engaged with them
and if need be, we have, um, pursued that.
Um, you know, especially if we've seen a really significant
non-delivery, um, Jason
And, and we're speaking about general practice here,
Pro uh, providers that might have general practice as part
of a wider set of functions sitting within them.
And we have pursued that.
Thank you. And if I can continue on, um, in pharmacy,
do you monitor outcomes in pharmacy at all?
Because I hear lots about big box pharmacy, um, firms
not filling the full script
and leaving all the expensive things on the script unfilled.
So people have to go to a community pharmacy for that
and just do the easy cheap stuff.
Um, so we have a auditing framework, um,
that is done on a risk based metrics
that pharmacies are ordered through, audited through.
Uh, so we would act on any time a community member comes
to us and indicates that they have concerns
or raise questions about a provider, uh, to Dale's point
and our community or regional
and local teams through planning funding
would have discussions
and if they had concerns, we can go in
and do audits at any stage of any provider.
So the, and the planning and funding team
who monitor all these contracts with the, each pharmacy
and with each, um, general practice, where are they located,
in what size are their teams?
Are they regional or district or,
Uh, so we have regional
and we have regional teams through,
through the planning and funding.
Now they'll be spread within the south island and central
and northern and so forth.
So, um, I'd have to give you the ex come back
to you the exact FTE number of each of those teams,
but they're based in the region and, and local districts.
So the, the, of the 10 billion primary
and community spend, uh, around 8 billion of
that is in the regions.
And there's four regional planning and funding teams,
and there's a national one as well.
So the national overall view
and does the national negotiations, the things
that you mentioned, we'd want to know about that at our, uh,
planning and funding team so we could follow those up
and a person can tell us, yeah.
Can come directly to us,
Stop coming to primary care comment.
What, what, what area of primary care primary,
um, go on, Jenny.
Thank you. Um, ps um, if we've got expanded,
expanded primary, uh, primary care practice,
what's gonna be the role of PS in that?
How, how will they change as a result?
Um, do we have too many?
What's the, what's the new world of PHO gonna look like?
Oh, look, I think that's still work to be completed
and we, uh, um, say for example, our conversation
and expanded GP practice and we had
and how do PHO support that they're a critical component
of the health system
and how we operationalize, um, uh,
primary care and general practice.
Well, there's funding, yeah, through the funding.
And they also provide services.
So they also support general practice
in a number of different ways.
That's variable across the country,
but they do supply a number
of support through general doctors.
Have you got PS in the country that are nonperforming?
Uh, not in Auckland, maybe?
Uh, look, I don't have direct knowledge
of underperforming ps, um, in Auckland,
but our regional teams, if they've got concerns
to the conversation, we're just, um, referring to,
they would be working with P hos if they had any
concerns about performance.
And nationally we would also support that, that role.
There are some new P hos being set up, right?
Not one in my ROHE is, uh, PHO.
And um, yes, it's another, um,
and that's with the corporatization, um,
of, of primary care.
And, um, some of the p hos have raised concerns
around funding will go away from them
and then into these corporate models,
and that will impact their ability
to deliver for their community.
Do you think that is a, is a fair, um, concern of the phs?
I mean, we would go back to that.
We would want to know the service delivery, the satisfaction
with care, the clinical indicators.
Were any of those changing?
Then we would become concerned
because there are, as Jason's saying already,
a variety of ownership models.
Um, there's also a dimension here about what's policy, uh,
and what's operational too.
So the, the ministry has a, um,
a view about capitation obviously,
and they're doing work on the, the formula as well
as there's a, there's, uh, work that we need to do
with the ministry, uh, around this question of the future
of P hos
because, uh, that
P hos have been longstanding since the primary care strategy
back in early 2000.
And, um, I think what you can see now is that, uh,
there is movement of practices
as new things form people are moving.
Uh, I think there's something in there that we'd want
to explore further.
Why is that and what is going on
because others are not moving.
So I think, um, that should be part of an ongoing evolution
that we better understand, um,
what general practice wider primary care, see
as a use useful vehicles for that medium
size level organizations.
And then I think that's, uh,
that's something we're very keen to also engage
with the ministry on
because of their policy function about that.
But it's absolutely something that we would like
to be thinking about this year, uh, those things.
Excellent,
Thank you. More sense? Well,
My primary is on PO, so I just get a set
of questions on the hos then I'm happy.
You're happy. Thank you. Right.
Good. Be Happy. Um, they, yeah. Good.
The, um, challenge of making decisions,
uh, you have
to take decisions about PHO funding once applications
to form a new PHO are submitted to you.
And yet, as you've discussed the policy decisions about
what the future place of PS have not been made,
how do you, um, how can you take decisions in that context
and your decisions have the potential
to be incredibly disruptive on the architecture
of P hos at the moment?
Will you make a moratorium
and any further changes until those
policy issues are resolved?
So I mean, we currently, we can get to the,
the current guidance and the policy setting that we have.
Um, I think the new, the question is an appropriate question
to ask because, uh, what we do not want
to have happen is unintended consequences
of very significant moves.
And so part of that is, um,
and that's exactly what I was alluding to in terms
of needing to work with the ministry, is
to better understand,
especially if we had significant movement, what
that might do in particular to patient facing services,
which we would not want interrupted.
Uh, because, uh, one of the functions
of p os is they have a lot of ancillary services
that might be attached to the general practice.
Maybe ancillary is not the right, but complimentary mm-hmm.
Patient facing services.
Uh, and we would be, um, of, is of great interest to us
that there's continuity of services
and clinical services for patients.
So we are very interested in that.
And so I think the simple answer is we have a policy setting
now, which we're working with,
and Jason, that can take you through what that is.
But we are also moving to think about, um, not wanting
to disrupt clinical practice and clinical care
and making sure we are always evaluating
and trying to walk that line appropriately.
And as, as you suggest, there's a lot
of thought on this right at the moment
is quite a critical juncture.
So yeah, we, we, we do a lot
of thinking about this right at the
Moment. I mean,
I'm hearing I some concern here.
Would you, uh, when do you think you'll be able
to make a call as to, um, a moratorium or not?
Well, I, I mean the other options be besides a moratorium,
but very soon I would say
We, yes, we, we would like to be thinking
what all the range of options are and what risks are
and how you might mitigate those without coming to a,
the landing on the right option right
Now. And, um,
thank you Mr. Chair. Just a, a few more.
The other element of P HOS is a,
um, a geographic placed based element
and one of the potentially disruptive changes
that is occurring is more, let's say, nationalized, uh,
rather than regional P hos.
How are you evaluating that change, um,
and what's the potential impact of losing
a place-based uh, approach?
Um, so at the moment, even if a new PHO is,
um, given the opportunity to have that contract,
we still require them to hold a regional, a contract
with one of the regional locations
and not an overarching national PHR agreement.
So while they may be one entity, they're still required
to have a contract with the region,
But what does that mean in practice?
Does it mean that they're actually grounded in that place
and understand that community or? Correct.
Yep. So they work with the regional as they,
so they're still required to have a contract
with say, TY Pan.
So they work with the local regional team, they're closer
to the community and the regional team will work with
that PHR and the services they provide
to within the district.
They may have their GP
Practice, but then they'd have, um, potentially
because they're national own, uh, have relationships
with clinics elsewhere in the, in the country.
And it'd sort of not be any visibility of how well
that PHO was integrated with the
practices in, in that part of the country.
Uh, look, we're, this is where we come back
to our planning and funding teams in the regions, that
that's a core part of their role is we need them
to be working with our p hos working
with our general practices to ensure that they are connected
to their communities.
They've got their health promotion plans, they're working
with their funding streams
to ensure they're getting those services to the communities.
And my colleague just raised the concern around
corporatization and how that impacts P hos.
Um, can you just describe what you, um,
the, the accountabilities that P hos have
to, uh, to the community and how that's given affected?
Yeah, so within the PHO agreement
and then, uh, language of a back toback agreement, they hold
with the general practice via the PHO, there are a number
of requirements in there, both clinical requirements,
operational requirements,
or across a number of the funding streams.
So health promotion activity services to improve access, oh,
Sorry. Perhaps, perhaps I should
clarify, sorry, that,
like what's the require there, is there any specifications
that the board must be drawn from the community
that they serve or have relationships
with the Iwi Maori partnership board
or what, what ties them to the community?
Um, oh, sorry. Within specified,
within the agreement there are key components
around the services to their delivery
and what they need to do, um, about
how they service their patient, register,
the services they're to provide and those,
and we would monitor those through the PHO.
So there is requirements in the PHO agreement
and the back to back agreement about services that they need
to be providing to their patient registers
is probably the way I'd describe it.
Hamish, so. Excellent.
And it's probably along very similar lines.
Um, this is probably coming from slightly different angle.
Um, what incentives are there for p os?
Um, and I think it was referred to as auxiliary services
or complementary services.
What incentives are there for p hos
to keep the general popula have good health outcomes
for the general population in the,
the region that they're serving?
Yeah, look, the PS are required to sort of have a,
a population view
and a plan against that
for the communities which their general practices serve.
And then within their funding streams, they,
they have health promotion funding, so that's
around activities to, um, prevent
or support health promotion within those communities.
There's other funding streams that they will use to also
around their planning implementation of those services
and assure that their general practice delivered
or frontline services to those communities.
So there's a number of ways that the p hos can do that.
They can do that directly with the GP practices
or some of the p hos will provide those services themselves
supporting a range of GP practices.
So we see a range of different delivery models across the
Country. Correct. And that's,
and
that's quite appropriate depending on some
of the communities they serve.
While we want national consistency around expectations,
we do want our communities
and our general practice to be able to have flex on
how they serve their local communities.
Excellent. Thank you. Asha,
did you have more subs on that?
Um, I have one, Jeanine is a sub,
Just the PHO when we have an expanded, um,
general practice, aside from the function
of delivering the funding down to the practice level, is it,
is the PHO just a a layer of bureaucracy?
Will, will it become just another layer of bureaucracy which
actually holds up a bunch of money, which could actually be
put down through into general practice?
Do we, do we still need to have the o Yes, we do have some.
I I think to Dale's point
before is it's work that we need to do at the ministry
around, um, PHO functions in the future.
However, at the moment, a number of the p os
through the country do provide services
to our community Oh, yes.
Across a number of, um, practices.
So there is mixed models,
but it is work, uh, work ministry that we need to undergo.
Dr Just to return to ask for some assurance
around the issue of disruption amongst P hos
and the, uh, service provision.
Uh, are you confident that there will be
no disruption to PHO services based on decisions,
um, taken from here on,
We would be very mindful
and thoughtful to be looking at those potential consequences
that we might see, but we also think there's absolutely need
for more policy work to be done here.
A and will you be able to get visibility
of the consequences of those decisions
before you take policy, uh, in order
to inform those policy decisions?
Well, we will be engaging with the ministry on
that actively now, uh, to talk through that.
Um, and then some of that needs to be determined.
What's the policy, policy decision of the ministry
and the timeframes for that versus what's going on now?
So, um, it's, it's a very much a live issue for us
to be thinking about that right now.
Yeah, I mean, the PHO policy work was commissioned more
than two years ago.
I understand there have been changes in the people involved,
but puts you in quite a tough position, doesn't it, to
not have a policy framework at this point in time?
Yes, but what I would say is that even with the changes
that we have seen, we've seen quite good, um,
that's why we need to be so clear about the service delivery
that we expect even with changes.
And so going back to that PHO agreement, the list
of services that we expect to be delivered to communities,
none of that's changed back
to back agreements haven't changed within that model.
So I think that is absolutely a one
safeguard to that system.
Uh, the, the thing that is, um,
of interest is just the degree of change there seems
to be in the system at the moment,
and also trying to understand what's driving some of that.
I, I think if I understand correctly,
the risk isn't mitigated by the contracting, right?
Because you could, um, a, a new PHO may say yes,
we'll be able to provide these services to, I don't know,
a hundred thousand people or 50,000 people though
that 50,000 will leave a PHO
with only half the numbers of people in it.
And the economics of running the services in the, um,
form PHO that they were in would then be very challenged.
That's the issue, isn't it? Yes.
Thanks. Done. Okay.
Um, I had a quick question around, um,
emergency departments
and there was one of the government's targets
and um, I note that we have seen a, a, an improvement
of several percent, um, being discharged
or transferred within six hours.
But my question's more around,
you got some high performing eds
and you've got some ones that are not performing so well.
So what are we doing
or what is Health New Zealand able to do
to take those learnings from the high performing ones
and disseminate them around New Zealand
to help bring everyone up a bit?
Yes. So we'll get Richard to answer that, just frame it.
So we have seen an uplift in performance of, um,
the emergency department target.
And that is also on top
of a year on year increase in volumes that, um,
patient presentations.
So, uh, despite this last year, a 4% uplift in patients
and in some individual eds,
it's actually been a lot more than that.
So it's not evenly spread.
Uh, the health target has improved across the country.
So we got to 74% in Q3
and in Q4 we got to 73.9,
which is 0.1% short of the milestone.
Um, and no rounding unfortunately.
Um, but um, there's a number of things there
that has been going on.
So, uh, one is exactly as you've described, understanding,
um, what's working well in large.
Um, it doesn't necessarily need to be large by way
of our best performing eds are in smaller provincial areas,
but what's working well there and how can we share
and disseminate that through, um, clinical groupings.
We also have appointed an executive lead, uh,
for the emergency department, which is Chris Lowry,
who's based down here, uh,
who has a previous clinical background.
Part of her role is to do that.
Then we've had a $20 million investment, uh,
ED Boost investment trying to hear, uh,
directly from the front line, uh, we to put investments.
Some of that has been the separation of pathways.
So when you come into an emergency department,
if it becomes clear that you are not going to be admitted,
you might go down now in some eds at different streams.
So that can be dealt with much more quickly.
Uh, and then just straight discharge
through a separate separation of patient streams.
And then the other way is working with those streams
where it does look like people are more complex
and then what's required to help speed that up.
Some of it relates to workforce
and some of that means new investments in part
of the workforce is also significant investment in some
of the emergency department facilities.
Mm-hmm. Because some of those facilities are old, outdated
and also not very good for the models of care.
So that's also in there.
Another bit of that is access to diagnostics,
because sometimes you can be waiting
for a diagnostic if you could speed up that access pathway
to the diagnostic that can help speed care.
And then most recently it's about innovation.
Uh, and the, and the emergency departments have been at the
very forefront of picking up some of these tools such
as Heidi, where we've got over a thousand now deployed into
the emergency department.
So they're very eager to use those tools.
And then if you take it out of the hospital contacts,
it's also the relationship with primary care.
And are we able to, for example, in some areas, give, uh,
advice about things that might not need to come to hospital
or give more options to primary care, uh, for them
to be able to do diagnostics themselves instead
of potentially having to send them to the hospital.
So giving them a wider clinical, uh, access to things
that might have previously only been in hospitals.
That's also helped.
So really that ed,
although it looks like it's an emergency department, um,
issued, it's not, it's actually a whole of health system,
how it's functioning, uh, issue.
That's very thorough. Answer.
Yes, answer. Um, you, you mentioned around some
of the tools that you're giving, um, primary care to help
diagnose so you don't end up in ed.
What are some of those examples?
Uh, so Yeah, technology based,
Some are technology, but some are also access
to diagnostics.
So for example, some clinics now are able to do point
of care testing, so they might have blood
tests actually there.
Uh, so you know, I've seen that in, I've seen
that in a number of practices where they might be able
to do cardiac troponin tests, for example.
Uh, and they have ECGs.
So if you have that, you might be able
to make the decision not to send that chest pain, uh,
to a hospital because you can, uh, follow
that up yourself in the practice.
So it's having those sort of more advanced, uh, access
to those diagnostic.
And then it can be as simple as a direct contact
between clinicians where you might want rapid, uh,
specialist advice
and then a specialist being available to give that advice.
And then, um, you don't need to rely on being sent
to the hospitals for that advice to be given.
But you are quite correct that if you were just
to have a look at a few of the, uh, ed departments
that are struggling, we've got those up to just the average,
uh, the target performance increases,
uh, pretty significantly.
We should also mention that over the next kinda six months,
we've got at least four
or five primary locations where we'll have temporary, uh,
ward facilities up and running.
And these are places where we could actually, um,
move patients much more quickly
because they won't bed block.
So we have a number of initiatives as well said,
but we've, we, we need to get to the point where
increased load doesn't keep deteriorating the position
where, you know, for example, as we have in winter,
so we're looking for a whole different
model for winter as well.
But there's a lot of options, but you're completely correct.
We just deal with the four or five who's struggling the most
and we get a very significant uplift.
Thank you. Thank you for your answers.
Just to add as well, we've recently trained our 16 primary
care clinicians around point of care ultrasound,
which is proving to reduce the use of either helicopters
or people going into the ED as well.
So they've been able to treat the rural communities
as in a another way of protecting our eds.
Thank you. We've got primaries from ish re, and Asha. Yes.
Excellent. Um, and so we're gonna change tech slightly
to kind of plan care, um,
and also if surgeries, um, what, what, um,
advancements have been made in the elect surgery, um,
and may be touch on elective boost, uh, to get
through our wait, wait lists.
So I'm like to, um, begin it.
So just as a background, our
elective surgical waiting list reached all time highs in
January, February of this year,
not previous scene in this country.
Uh, 80 to 90,000 people waiting for elective surgery
and nearly 40,000 people waiting over 120 days.
Um, we've been trying to make a concerted effort
to bring those numbers down
and give more people access to surgery.
We, so there's a number of streams of work.
So one is to increase the overall surgery
that we are able to do.
And in terms of our own hospitals, we have uplifted
that this year compared to the previous year that has, um,
meant work hospital by hospital.
'cause it has to essentially be done theater by theater so
that we are able
to now see across the country the relative utilization
of our theaters, the efficiency of those theaters, uh,
how we put our patients, uh, through those theaters.
So we have a very good view about that now,
which we have a previously done.
So it has been one of the advantages of Health New Zealand,
that visibility and then our feedback are we able
to go into feedback loops back to districts
and say, this is what this you are looking like compared
to others as well.
So that's been the first thing.
The second thing has been, uh,
very concerted effort on our longest waiters
and bringing those longest waiters down.
So being very thoughtful about who we are putting through,
uh, the theater list.
And then we've also had partnerships with, um, uh,
other facilities that are able to do, uh,
additional theaters, uh, and lists for us.
And we've had an elective boost where we,
I think we're aiming for 10,000
Five hundred and sixty seventy three seven, no,
ten five seventy nine, seventy nine, seventy nine,
Sorry. And then
16,000 was achieved.
So we've absolutely been trying to use as much, uh,
available capacity wherever
that might be around the country.
Finally, there are a number of, uh, in the public service,
uh, we have new theaters have come online, for example,
in Auckland, uh, uh, county Monaco,
additional theaters about to come online.
And also we have, uh, as well.
So we are very much thinking about the model
of care in those theaters
and how, for example, in Auckland, uh,
specialists from other, uh, hospitals are coming
to really focus on elective surgery
and trying to have that separation of acute with elective
because the more you can separate that,
that means we can have less interruptions to elective, uh,
theater be
because it's dedicated just
to electives when you put them together.
There's obviously some efficiencies about that at times,
but there's also inefficiencies when you might get a very
large increase in acute.
So we are very much thinking about the model of care
for surgery as well.
Excellent. So, um, so take from your answer, there's been,
um, an uplift hospitals also using other, other facilities.
You mentioned that, um, the wait list was up to 80,000.
Did I hear correct? Yes.
Do we have an updated figure for
what we're sitting on at the moment?
I do. Um, so we have seen a, a decline.
Um, and so the peak for waiting
for treatment occurred at 82,179 on the 12th of January.
Uh, that dropped to 74,800 for this, uh, reporting period.
And for those waiting over 120 days, it was at
around 37,000, and that's reduced to 27,000.
So it is nearly, uh, what's that, uh, over a third, uh,
around a third reduced, uh, 30th of June.
So, uh, that's both the total
and the long waiters, uh, reduced.
But as you can see, we still have a very long way to go, uh,
because, uh, we were previously as a health system, uh,
and not having people wait over 120 days
and having much, um, more assurance
that people would be seeing within that timeframe
and that that is our aim.
Excellent. And I appreciate, um, there's an emphasis
to get those wait times down.
Um, is it cost effective to use private providers
for some of these surgeries?
Uh, well we have, I hand over to Jason
who in fact oversees the program.
Um, we have, I think there's several ways to answer that.
We certainly go through a procurement process
and a view about value for money
and also, uh, making sure they answer the specifications
that we would expect.
Uh, and so we do that.
The second thing with the scale of what
has occurred in terms of our waiting list, uh, we need
to use as much capacity that's available in the country
to be able to bring these down.
And we have always used other providers, uh, in fact, uh,
we have just been looking at
what is the relative percentage, uh,
that we might be outsourcing.
And over the last few years,
it actually hasn't changed very much at all
that relative percentage.
So the volumes are going up,
the relative percentage hasn't changed in the last two years
very much so we've always had a, um, a need to use others,
but the scale of the problem is large
and, um, we have to use other capacity if we were
to bring it down because our ho a lot
of our public hospitals are close to capacity
and it's only these new theaters coming online
that we get access to that.
But I hint to Jason,
Oh, I think that was explained it very well.
The critical factor here is reducing those wait
lists first and foremost.
And, um, as Dale indicated, we go
through a procurement process for our private providers
to go through, um, and we get the best
and most efficient price through that process,
but we bring back to the patient
to the reason why we're using private
providers through that capacity.
Effectively, the strategy is to optimize all
of the available resourced capacity, uh, in order
to increase our access,
but we've got a real emphasis on internal production.
Uh, you know, we need to do more
to get our internal production up
and we are doing that as well.
So we should only be contracting out
or working with partners once more, uh,
and our best on our internal production.
So we're trying to work on all of these
that ultimately optimizing the resource capacity.
And the
Next, I'm sorry, but we had Dr.
Brent here who runs the Northern hospitals who be able
to answer what he does at the, at the front line
around, uh, theaters.
So That's a good example about what's
local and what's regional.
So, uh, so locally, you know,
we charge all the local theater, all our districts
to actually obviously increase their performance.
We monitor that very closely.
We look at, uh, late starts, early finishes, for example.
We have, um, uh, so we have all these metrics that we look
and we look by every specific service and every specialty.
And, and we actually have specific plans by district,
by specialty to try
and to get them down now to actually show
how the system's now working in the sense of regional
where say, my role in supporting this is,
is say we would like in the northern region meet on a weekly
basis all the people who are in charge
of their local districts.
We go through each other's performance
and we actually are challenging each other on
that performance and then share
resources amongst each other.
Uh, and uh, that may be actually sharing theaters.
It may be people, um, to, uh, or we may be moving patients,
and that's how the region,
we then also work on getting those electives down as well.
So it's an example of how locally Yes.
Get on with it and they need to understand
by service how they're performing.
But then regionally, uh, actually we'd actually bring
that up a, a level
and actually work collectively to help get them down.
And then again, I would meet with my three other, um, uh,
executive regional, uh, director colleagues,
and we will also meet on a way on this issue as well.
And we would also say, well,
actually is this something we could, you are doing
that we not doing?
And we sometimes we'll be shifting the resources,
but it's primarily at that local level, uh, that we,
we, we start at
Just following the line of questioning
around cost effectiveness.
Um, are you able to give us any figures on say, um,
compar cost of doing Pardon?
Please. Sorry. Yeah, sorry.
Thought I was interruption. Got,
Um, Are you able to give us a figure on the comparative
costs on average, maybe by type of elective surgery, um, uh,
doing it privately versus, um, done within
and do, like, are you able
to elucidate us a bit more in terms of that?
Um, and do you have any figures in front of us?
Um, I need to come back with, um, figures to the committee.
I don't have that level of detail with me.
Would they normally be higher or lower?
Um, I think it's a, a wee bit depend.
I'm making the assumption. I don't want to do that
before I need to provide information to you.
What is the longest duration
or length of the surgical outsourcing contract
that Health New Zealand is in
At the, well, we're, at the moment we're largely out to,
uh, uh, to the end of this financial year, June 30th.
What is the, um, there is a direction from the minister
to, um, expand that.
What do you think you're likely
to do in the coming, coming year?
I think working with our private providers,
we do know now we need a certain level of, um, activity
through the private, uh, private providers.
And we're working with them now, but I think we'd need a
contract length of three, three to five years
to give consistency to the market.
Thank you. Okay.
Pri
I was just gonna ask one, like one step.
So in, you've got to hospital
and there's also Grace Hospital,
which is a private hospital,
but does a lot of, uh, surgeries on behalf
of the public system.
What would happen in my region if
we didn't have Grace there,
If we didn't have it? Just,
If we didn't have Grace Hospital?
Well, Well, I think if we, as Dale explained, we need,
that's why we are working with the private sector
because certain circumstances
and some, some specialties, we don't have that capacity.
So that's why we need those relationships.
We have more people waiting longer, right?
Yep. Right. And the requirement,
Thank you. I'm trying
to understand how the system currently, um,
promotes or stifles innovation.
And I'm thinking specifically about the trust in Wellington
because we do know that, uh, the cost of putting someone
through a depression service like that for a week at
Tutu is the same as one night at Wellington Hospital.
Um, we do know that the results of, um, the ed Wait Times
and Wellington Hospital are problematic.
And in fact, Wellington Hospital wrote to the trust
to say they would support a service.
And we also know that having, um,
monitoring in the three months
after someone has been
through acute mental health is really important in terms
of reducing their risk around suicidal ideation and so on.
So the, the question is really, um, how is it
that when something that looked to be effective
and was applauded as a good innovation has not been able
to be supported by our public health system
and on a value for money, uh,
and a needs base for this type
of service seems to make sense.
What is it in the system that is preventing us from being
able to fund these innovations?
Yeah, look, um, I'll actually build off, um, I,
I'm not going to speak to the specific proposal from the
organization you talked to, but I am gonna talk to, uh, Dr.
Bramleys, um, response, which is about, you know,
how do we improve and how do we take better out
of what's happening across the, the country?
It would be useful to know about the specific one.
Shall I keep my flow? And then I'll come back. How's that?
And then if I don't cover it, you can, you can ask me again.
Thank you. So, you know, how we build, um, uh, initiatives
that are working well across each
of the emergency departments.
I'm fair to say that Wellington is the,
with the mental health, uh, ed Target, one of the, uh,
the lower performing, uh, areas.
What I'll say is that some
of the characteristics, and again, Dr.
Brand has touched on this in the emergency departments
that we know are working well in terms of patient flow, are
that there's good engagement community organizations
helping that flow through.
Also that there is a, a strong, um, uh,
interdisciplinary team between mental health
and the ED specialists in terms of how they manage patients
with, uh, acute mental health presentations.
And also what we see coming through is actually the, uh,
the emergency departments have got peer support specialists
in, in them are actually starting
to show some promise in terms of how they are adding
to the, uh, to the mix.
And the two examples I'll use, uh, Waikato and Christchurch.
So the Christchurch ED has a very strong, um, good, um,
operating, uh, interdisciplinary team between mental health
and the ED staff also have some good space in terms of
where those people with mental health, uh, presentations,
um, can be streamed off and supported in Waikato.
Um, again, a high, a higher performing area.
They have really good engagement
and flow between the ED out to the community, uh, daily,
sometimes three times a week, uh, meeting with the, uh,
community services to help the flow through.
As this relates to the Wellington Emergency Department,
they have a range of improvement initiatives.
And this is also very much in the vein of Dr, um,
Dr. Branch response where the executive, uh,
regional director is looking at, uh, what the suite
of responses they need across that emergency department.
So some, some areas in terms of their improvement plan,
which they have moved their crisis team closer
to the emergency department.
So that crisis team is able to respond to presentations
more closely into that emergency department.
Um, they have also, uh, looked at
how they might get flow out of their, um,
acute adult inpatient unit out to other alternatives, um,
uh, in the community,
but also have a number
of other initiatives in place. Can I,
Can I just pick up on that because Yes, yes.
You've talked, um, clearly about the crisis response
and appreciate that the tutu,
as I understand it, is about recovery.
And you've talked about the flow through
to other services in the community.
That's where the gap is,
and that's where the peer crisis support the,
the crisis cafe has even said that they would work alongside
because it's an and and no.
So there is a gap there and, um, and,
and there isn't funding for
something that can fill that gap.
So I get, I'll park the, um, uh, tutu point.
I'll, I'll we'll get to that.
But again, I think you're quite right
that there is good promise around the crisis cafes,
and we are rolling those out across the country.
So we are seeing people that would've previously turned up
at the emergency department actually choose to go
to the crisis cafe for support.
Yeah, but they're not a recovery service, are they?
They're they're a crisis support. No, no,
They, no, look, all of the mental health services are part
of recovery, right?
So this is, you know,
people will present at many different points, um,
along their recovery journey, right?
So absolutely. The, the crisis cafes are part of that,
you know, peer support
and keeping well is, is absolutely part
of the recovery journey as is, you know, to your point,
ensuring that when people have been, you know,
had a more intensive level of care,
that they are getting follow up in the community.
And that's why we monitor seven day follow up
and 28 day, you know, you know, uh, follow up.
And again, back to the Wellington, um, uh, ed,
um, initiative, these are the, the initiatives that we are,
or that the ED has, sorry, that district
and that region have put in place.
What, um, uh, for the Wellington region to, uh, improve
that target decision was made actually not to fund,
uh, Tutu.
It's not, not a provider we have funded in the past.
And these are the initiatives that we, um,
that the team are backing to help achieve the target.
And they will continue, again,
as Andrew Brent talked about, to review that.
If we're not achieving the target, then we'll look at
what other initiatives need to be in place.
But the second question I have, if I may, Mr.
Chair, you may, and it goes back to outcomes,
and this is something I can do psychologist
and, um, is related,
but unrelated is, is that we see, say for example,
with a c sensitive claims people with PTSD being referred to
talk therapy or counselors,
because we do not have the appropriate acute level of, uh,
specialist service available,
and they may do that for years, in some cases with, um,
no measurable outcome
because they have not gone to the right specialist.
Where in the system are those outcomes
being tracked in terms of people being referred
to the right service for the right level of acuity
and getting the right treatment?
Yeah, so look, the, um, so at our broader systemwide
for mental health, we've had, we've got a range
of outcome tools and measures the, um, a om uh, the HOS
and the Hoka for child and Youth.
So that tracks the measures across a number of domains.
But as you, as you get down closer to the clinical team,
actually that's part of a multidisciplinary team approach
where you're actually reviewing the care
provided to an individual that sits within
that multidi disciplinary team, where on a daily or weekly
and sometimes monthly basis
where they're doing case conferences, looking at what's, uh,
what's happening in terms of that person's journey
and whether they are receiving the right inputs
and that it's not just within the multidisciplinary team,
but also more broadly, uh, to the NGO supports
and other community supports.
Do you accept, um, the concern from some of the clinicians
that the right level of care is not being provided
because of the workforce shortages
with all the best intentions in the world
and with clinical teams, that at the end of the day,
if someone presents at a CC, they can't get
to the right service.
So they're given counseling that, these are some
of the scenarios that I've been specifically, uh, told about
that feels like a workforce problem.
And I understand there's a lot going on in the workforce
space, but it doesn't really provide value
for money if the treatment is not treating,
uh, what needs to be treated.
And the mental health, it's not as simple as you say,
is kind of looking at someone's knee
and going, well, they need to go to a knee doctor.
So it gets a bit conflated.
Would you accept that the workforce is having the crisis is
having an impact on those outcomes?
Look, there's lots of different questions on
what you're asking, but look, what I do accept is
that everyone that comes to work in Health New Zealand,
and particularly those that work in mental health,
are absolutely focused on delivering the best possible care.
And we are working to improve our system.
We've got a range of interventions
and new services in place.
We are tracking really well in terms
of growing our workforce
and the auxiliary workforces that we've talked about, uh,
particularly with psychology since 2023 to 2025,
we've had about a 3% up uptick in our number of,
um, psychologists.
Yes, there, I think there's more work that we need to do
between a CC
and mental health recognizing, particularly people
that have complex trauma around what is the right stream of
where to get support.
And I don't think the system has quite got that right.
But, um, what I,
but again, back to my first response is
that people are working really hard and sometimes and, and,
and, you know, in quite precious environments.
Absolutely. Except, thank you.
Excellent. Uh, new primary,
Dr. Vera. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
I have a set of questions about public health.
Uh, the committee, um,
and anyone with a parliamentary email address has a lot
of questions and representations made about prostate
cancer screening.
Can you give us, um, an understanding of
how you are evaluating the benefits
of prostate cancer screening
and what role you see for it in the, um,
public health system, if any?
Uh, thanks.
Uh, we haven't
yet developed a view on prostate cancer screening.
I'm aware there is some interest across the board.
I'm aware that the evidence, um, is very conflicting,
uh, around the value of that.
Uh, and I'm aware that, uh,
certainly from a public health perspective,
the evidence is not as strong.
Um, and that much of the interest is around various,
uh, um, advocacy groups.
And also, uh, uh, we are aware that, um,
the kids control agency, Tahu has, um,
asked to have a look at that.
So that's as far as we've taken that so far.
Oh, thank you, Dr.
Vel, you, there is a historical backdrop
to the question of course, too.
And, um, in earlier times, the National Health Committee,
when it put out at screening criteria,
specifically looked at prostate cancer,
and at that point said there wasn't sufficient evidence
for a publicly funded screening program.
Uh, since that time, there have been updates
and reviews of the evidence,
and I think it's been very much in the
opportunistic piece rather than a population
wide screening program.
But what, what I would say to that as well is that in
that function, you have to continuously be updating
and reevaluating the evidence
to then determine have we met a threshold
that might have changed that view and decision?
Because, um, as you know, the, it's always about the balance
of the, the harms and benefits of a
or nationally organized screening program.
But we, as Nick's saying, is, uh, we need to be, uh,
vigilant about that dynamic of evidence
and being open to re-reviewing the evidence.
Yeah, that's fantastic.
And, um, we had a,
we had a petition earlier in the year
and at, in, um, the submission
official an an official submission to the petition,
we were told a review is underway.
Uh, can you give any update on, on that review
of the evidence for prostate cancer screening? I'm
Not aware of a review by Health New Zealand.
I am aware that the ministry are looking at some policy, uh,
around that as well,
Policy on whether or not it's, uh,
I, I think they're looking at the review itself
and, uh, certainly not aware
of Health New Zealand conducting a review at this stage.
So back to your comment, Dr.
Brandley, about remaining vigilant, where is that function
of reviewing the evidence?
Sitting at the, at the moment?
Yes. So we would say that the national que
so we would be able to provide technical expertise,
public health expertise,
epidemiological expertise into answering the questions.
Um, the policy decisions of a national screening program,
uh, partners is led by the ministry, uh,
including the development of a national case.
Yeah, this isn't no question about when are you gonna do
it, but we're, we're getting requests from member
of the public and we want to understand where do we go
to cite the right evidence that's gone
through a proper, proper process.
And,
Um, we will get back to you on that.
I'm sorry, I don't know. Yeah. Okay.
Thank you. Um,
and, you know, screening has the potential to, uh,
vastly improve people's health.
What opportunities are you looking at in, um,
in expanding the range of conditions
that can be screened for?
Yes, and absolutely.
I mean, both screening has a huge opportunity to
enhance health and prevent, uh, cancer
and, and other conditions.
But of course, also if, if not carefully evaluated,
can do more harm, it's good.
So, um, we are looking at bowel cancer screening
and, uh, age extensions, further age extensions to that.
We're considering that also looking at lung cancer screening
in both cases they're are very good evidence for those.
Um, they have big, very big, uh,
um, price to them.
And so we are just looking at the
evaluation of those at the moment.
Can you explain why, um, bowel screening, uh, is
so costly when there's, uh,
an expected reduction in the number of colonoscopies
that need to be done
because of the FIP symptomatic pathway
that's recently been rolled out?
Uh, yes. So the fit
for symptomatic pathway hasn't been fully rolled out yet.
We are in the early stages of rolling that out.
Um, the evidence for fit
and what it can achieve is anything between a 30 to 60%
reduction in the number of colonoscopies required.
However, uh,
the UK experience actually was an increase in colonoscopies
as they, uh, put the fit testing through general practice.
So it varies hugely internationally, uh,
and, um, we haven't got any really good evidence on the
impact on Maori Pacific, et cetera, with that program.
But we do expect as we roll it out,
it will reduce our colonoscopy waiting lists.
Well, isn't there the opportunity, sorry, sorry,
I just, um, there is a nuance also
that screened patients tend
to have significantly more polyps found if
they're fit positive.
Uh, so lowering the screening age in terms
of costs also includes the histopathology.
All that needs to be factored in
And, and the length of the colonoscopy itself
is quite significantly longer.
'cause you've already selected out,
Okay, You've already selected out, uh, the population
by them being fit positive,
uh, through the screening program.
So they're at a higher risk than those who are symptomatic.
Thank you. Can you describe, uh, where your plans
for implementing lung cancer screening are?
Uh, yeah. So we've been doing some work on that
and evaluating, uh, uh, the program, um,
and working our way through, um, considering whether
over the next year or two there would be able
to be a lung cancer program screening program.
Uh, so there's a lot of work going on, uh,
evaluating that at the moment.
What is a lot of work? Pardon? What is a lot of
Work? Well, it's a, it
requires a full business case.
It's an awful lot of money.
It requires treasury input. It's, uh,
Do do you have a view on the design
of the screening program that is optimal for New Zealand?
Yes. What is it?
Uh, it's based on smoking history.
So, and how long ago should people
who have stopped smoking be
before they don't need screening?
I'm sorry, I can't Answer that. Alright.
We have primary with Dr. Campbell. Excellent. Brilliant.
Um, and probably touching on a little bit of previous, um,
section, but probably broadening it out past, past cancer,
um, what is Health New Zealand's current assessment
of population health trends
and which interventions make the
biggest difference over time?
And it may be inter, I appreciate it may be some
of the interventions you've just mentioned
just for our exam question. Feels like it
Just, uh, I would start by saying if you look at the sum
of mortality morbid, it goes to life expectancy.
And we started the presentation
by saying New Zealand actually does fairly well
by life expectancy sitting at around 82 years.
And then if you look at the major causes of mortality,
there's still cancer
and cardiovascular mortality, both
of which have seen fairly significant declines
in recent decades.
Some of that decline is now starting to level off.
And so as some of the gains in life expectancy,
and we've mentioned too, the difference between, uh,
different population groups in particular Maori
that life expectancy gave was eight now at six years.
But again, some of that's now leveling off as well.
So I think you could say we've had a high degree of success
around, uh, reducing amenable mortality.
So that mortality, which, uh, we can prevent by suitable
interventions of the healthcare system.
We've still got a bit of a way to go.
We are also seeing modern advances in medicines too,
especially in oncology,
which look like they will make quite significant differences
to individual tumor and cancer streams.
Then if you look at the risk factors
that might cause ill health,
we have seen some very significant decline.
So for many, many years,
the leading modifiable risk factor influencing ill health
was tobacco smoking.
Uh, and we have seen the, the significant decline of that.
So we're sitting at 6.8% as of the very latest survey
for Pacific, just over 10, and for Maori around 15 to 16%.
So we still have gains to be made there.
Then you've got an amalgamation
of other risk factors which are moving.
So, uh, obesity
and there is some debate about definitions of obesity
and healthy weight as it were.
But obesity, rising obesity is absolutely irrespective
for a number of diseases in particular.
Diabetes is of concern for us,
and we are seeing rising numbers of cases of diabetes
and that impacts multiple different conditions.
So that would be an area we're concerned about.
And then in terms of other risk factors, uh, in particular
diet, the foods that people eat, uh, exercise, um, those,
that, that cluster of things become very important as well.
What I'd say in terms of access to health services, uh, it's
of concern that we have, um,
although it's improving, there is still significant access
to services issues.
So in prior care, as we've seen, we've still got 20 to 25%
of people, uh, having difficulties accessing,
and then we have very long waiting lists.
So then in terms of our actual treatment services, uh,
we are seeing improvements for sure,
but there's more to be done.
So, and then finally what I'd say about health outcomes is
that they sit within a wide range of socioeconomic
determinants as well
and your access to those, uh, things, for example,
disposable income affects the food you buy
and, um, you know, degree that you might have a education
to get a good job and all of those things.
So it's sitting within that cluster as well.
Overall, I'd say New Zealand's doing well compared to
where we, uh, see ourselves with other countries.
Uh, but we know where we might need to continue
to intervene both at risk factors,
but also in treatment services.
Amazing. Brilliant. 'cause we, we was angling
with appreciates quite a big, big question is really
what Workers Health New Zealand doing
and the health promotion space
to actually people can live well.
Um, so they don't actually need
Health New Zealand services. Okay,
Great. Well that's much easier
question for the,
I think Dr. Bramleys
pastor, uh, public health as well
Already has, we'll give him a gold start.
Um, yes, so there's a, a lot of, uh,
work going on in the health promotion for, um, space,
and particularly we are focusing on mental health promotion.
Uh, and, uh, we have a program around alcohol
and, uh, promoting, uh, um, a a number of initiatives
around reducing alcohol intake.
Uh, there's also, um, cigarette smoking and tobacco.
We are working on that. We also provide quite a significant
pro program of promotion around our, uh,
immunization programs, uh, measles more recently.
And, uh, also all of our other screening programs.
So we're working through a whole lot of areas.
We fund, uh, significant programs
around green prescription active families, a number
of healthy, uh, action programs.
And certainly physical activity is an area
where we can get really good health gains from.
And so we do, uh, work promoting that as well, as well
as work around, uh, healthy eating
and, uh, uh, so a lot of different promotion initiatives.
We also within the alcohol space are working with, um,
sports groups and over 20 of, uh,
the various rugby unions at a second division level, uh,
are now involved and,
and, uh, um, looking at, uh, their sponsorship and,
and reducing the sponsorship on alcohol.
Excellent. Um, and of course you did mention
about immunizations.
What, um, and there has been a great uplift in
our vaccination rates.
What challenges do you still face when
it comes to immunizations?
Yeah, so I,
I think we'll call it vaccine hesitancy is our biggest
challenge, and particularly in rural areas
and hi Maori communities
and to a lesser extent in Pacific families.
So that is where our, uh, biggest gains can be made.
Uh, and that's the real challenge around getting some
of those communities, particularly post COVID, but even
before that to trust us again.
Excellent. Thank you. All right, Ingrid, Larry Primary,
Thank you. It's just a
question around some of the numbers that we see,
um, being discussed.
Like 82% of people are seen within three weeks, uh,
getting referred to specialist Mental
Health and Addiction services.
I'm trying to reconcile that
with the recent health survey data that showed that, um,
one in 10 adults said they were not able
to access mental health and addiction last year,
and one in four young people mentioned experiencing serious
levels of mental distress.
Um, so wanting to test the veracity of the number,
and when I look at how that 82% is, is made up, the men,
the Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission, uh, has said
that the overall use
of specialist services has decreased over five years.
So fewer people are accessing services
and that's particularly true for youth.
So we are not seeing overall access
or unmet need being addressed.
And I'm wondering whether you see that statistic of 82%
as statistically relevant
or whether it would be more meaningful.
Are you collecting the data on those who are
not being referred for other reasons?
Look, um, there's quite a few questions there, Ingrid.
I'll do my, my best to, to step through.
So look what we, what we've seen overall from our, um,
mental health conviction system is actually
for the last across, um, between, uh, last year
and this year is actually an improvement in, in access.
So in terms of the individuals accessing our mental health
system, we've actually grown from, uh, uh,
178,535 in 2020 3 24 to, uh,
uh, 184,409 in 2020 4 25.
So that's a 3.3% increase
when you get down into the detail, uh, for youth.
So we've actually seen an increase for youth across, um, uh,
between the two years where there's been about a 14.9%
increase, um, in access of numbers accessing our, um, our,
our mental health services.
Also, what we've seen across our, uh, our primary, um,
access and choice services is, um,
an increase in numbers actually, um,
accessing those, those services.
So, so the first part of your question was
around numbers accessing.
So we're seeing growth in that that doesn't necessarily go
to where the need might be in the community.
Mm-hmm. And I think I answered earlier,
that's why the Ministry of Health, uh, are doing a, uh,
you know, undertaking or committed
to undertake a prevalence study to understand
where the need is and whether we've got the settings right,
um, across the system.
Thank you. So is there any way of capturing the number
of people who are not being referred
because gps, for example, know
that the services are not available?
Um, And,
and I take your point that the prevalence survey should be
able to answer that, but in the interim,
what I'm hearing from clinicians is that a lot
of referrals are not made
because the services are not simply there.
Therefore, the 82% for me seems to be counting a subset
of need rather than the true, uh, requirement and,
and seems rather disingenuous.
So that's really what I'm trying to test here.
Look, I I think the, you know, if I had it my way,
I think a hundred percent of people that, uh, you know,
have need and access, you know,
with access services when they, they need it.
I think, um, the, the two targets
around wait times actually give us some answer around, um,
whether those are getting the response.
So that's based on, um, uh, you know, from point of referral
to receiving that first contact and first assessment.
So on, on both the, um, the primary care, mental health, um,
target, and also the secondary, uh, the,
the three week wait time for secondary services,
we're actually seeing improvement.
Are you counting the declines as well?
Because that's another piece that's not in
Yes. So yeah, so we, so
we do look at the declines, right?
And also, you know, clinically as well in terms of
how the service operates is that people,
and particularly this business for hospital
and specialist services Yeah.
Is that people aren't just declined without a pathway
to go to.
So people may be declined
and, um, uh, asked to go back to their, um,
general practice in terms of getting, you know, um, access
and, and choice services.
Mm-hmm. Um, and also the the range of other support services
that are there and available
And where can we find that data.
So we don't, we don't track the data in the way
that you are asking that
Question. Would that be useful?
Because then wouldn't
that give us a more complete picture of who of, of access
to services, which is what we're talking about. Yeah.
So, so look, look, look, it could be useful,
but it's certainly not something that we track in the way
that you, you are asking it. Yeah.
Thank you. All Right. Jenny Mark.
Thank you. Palliative
care, I think I mentioned it earlier.
Um, just wanted to circle around
and do a couple of quick quick fires on that.
Um, no specialist palliative care in hospital.
Is there a funding issue there?
Um, also how many FTE specialist palliative care
inside Health New Zealand
and sister dying FTEs
inside Help Brazil have those numbers.
I deal with the wider path of care. Yeah, sure.
Patrick, the moment. And then, um,
rich can go into wee bit more detail.
So we've got a quite a certain focus on the palliative care
in this system within museum
'cause there are issues on delivery.
So we've recently had the pediatric palliative care alpha
consultation closed, um,
a couple months ago we had over 700 pieces of, um,
uh, feedback combat the adult health care model.
We are recently that's just closed.
So our teams will be going through that,
um, feedback as well.
And both of those aim to be pediatric early next year
with the adult being a bit later.
Mm-hmm. Based on that feedback, we're working heavily
with Hospice New Zealand
and hospices throughout the country on a, uh,
funding model review
and information review from hospices to help New Zealand
to better allow us to make good decisions.
I think one of the legacy issues we've had, um, say
for example in hospices for 20 dbs, we've got a very
different funding model, very different access criteria
that very different service requirements.
That also includes a carers for department
as home based support services.
So we look at the bigger part care to start with.
We've got those three key, um, pieces, work moment, um,
hospice should be finished around during next year.
And the outcome of that is a more consistent purchasing
framework and more consistent funding
framework for hospices.
So we know and hospices know what these can yeah.
Be better informing our communities around that, alongside
that as the two out care reviews around adult
pediatric models of care.
So a lot of work just in the overall space
and alludes a wee bit to the specialist
care service we can provide both from a hospital
are really looking at a community led model.
Um, as you can imagine,
the pediatric feedback was heavily focused on families
and community being able access close at home best travel.
Um, but that doesn't necessarily mean we need a
specialist in every point.
It means about how do we access that
and how does that get put into their model of care working
with the general practice
and the local community to support those families.
So that, that piece of work around palliative,
there's three things coming out. The hospice,
Hospice work we done Then, then the
Pediatric and, And when will
that all be done and dusted by?
Uh, so we'll release the feedback on the
pediatric early next year.
So that'll go back to communities just going
through the review process.
The adults just closed. That will be later next year.
The work we're doing with hospices, we're hoping to have
that by June next year.
Yeah. I think with hospice particularly everyone probably
is a hospice in their community.
Um, they, they were able to access lotteries funding.
They're no longer able to do that.
It's really put a bit of pressure on on what
that they're able to provide for their communities.
Absolutely. So, and we're working with understanding
'cause it's been become not, blurred is the wrong word,
but they lost the shops funding.
Yeah. The like, or whatever grant funding they could get in
donations and what is funded through Health New Zealand.
So this is intended to get really good information
so all the hospices in New Zealand are feeding in that data
and we'll receive that
and then work with Hospice New Zealand on that.
Great. Look forward to that.
Alright, we've got 10 minutes left in this segment.
We don't have any questions, so I'll suspend us
and we can come back at three 30
and we will conclude health infrastructure
Three 30. We're
not getting a 15 minute break. Yes.
Update my Instagram. What
Here? David?
Kevin, you're in the box seat.
All right, so we have two hours to go.
We've got health infrastructure, asset management
and investment, current state
of hospital infrastructure up eight on projects, digital
and data Vero.
Thanks Mr. Chair.
I'd like to ask about the health digital investment plan.
Um, thank you for publishing this plan.
There are many ways, it's quite informative.
I'd like to talk about page 10 of the plan
and on which it includes this pie graph.
And I wondered if you could explain it
and am I correct in understanding that it means
of the investment 28% will be directed primarily at
a achieving improvements in the clinical
and operational experience?
Yes, that's correct. So in terms of the modeling, um,
you're obviously interdependencies between those areas.
So clinical's dependent on infrastructure, for example.
Uh, but in terms of the primary focus of that investment,
that's where the primary focus goes.
So the technology is 45%
and that, do I take it that reflects the current state of
hardware and software and the fact that
that doesn't have sort of an end user benefit,
but must be must be done.
Nearly half the investment will be just in the tech.
Yeah, correct. And, and that's the reason why in the plan,
we talk about stabilization modernization first.
So if our foundations aren't solid
and today they're not, um, then the, again, um,
modernize the application, clinical application, the state,
um, isn't gonna improve performance
and give you the value you need.
So then that's a 45%
and then 28%, those are the big wedges in the pie.
So the thing that's a little concerning is that only 2%
of the benefits are likely to be
for the people in whanau experience, um, 2%
for intelligence and insights
and 10% for digitally enabled models of care.
Why are those ones weight have carry such small weights?
Uh, so firstly,
the percentage is about investment rather than value.
So I think, I think if you look at infrastructure,
if you look at, um, supporting clinical service delivery,
then they, they do have flow on benefits into, um,
people in whanau.
Um, and clinical, for example, includes population health,
um, um, digitally enabled models of care leverages off of
that clinical investment as well.
Um, so the reason those are lower is simply
because we've got significant underinvestment, uh,
and current issues around our clinical
and our infrastructure estate,
which we have to, we have to address.
So it can't up the, uh, benefits to
enable digital or new models of care
until the technology is addressed.
It's a, it's a mix. So, so predominantly, yes,
there's a lot of, um, future digitally enabled models
of care benefits that we can't realize
without those foundations.
There are of course opportunities,
so there's always opportunities to leapfrog, uh,
and leverage some of those modern platforms to be able
to put digitally enabled models of care out there quicker.
A good example would be some
of the work we're doing on remote patient monitoring,
or you can actually use that technology
to deliver care out in the community.
Uh, you're not reliant on existing infrastructure
or existing integration with our clinical systems.
So it does depend,
but, um, yeah, we've got significant legacy complexity and,
and, um, and, uh, challenges around our current state.
I I wanted to, um, go to the 0.9, um,
on population health, um, which is,
sorry it doesn't have page numbers.
Uh, the, um,
action items under population health
seem very focused on the most important specialty,
which is infectious diseases.
However, uh,
long-term conditions could also benefit from a population
health approach enabled by data,
and in fact they're far more common in terms
of their health impacts and infectious diseases.
So why are infectious diseases prioritized instead of, um,
long-term conditions and chronic disease?
Uh, that's a good question. So, so, um, primarily
because of the investment needed in that space.
So we work very closely
with our population health colleagues,
clinical colleagues in development of the roadmaps.
What we do have in the population health space,
which is probably a reflection in the investment need,
is we do have, um, pretty good modern
population health platform capabilities
that support our screening programs, um, support our, uh,
sort of health promotion activities.
Um, and we're leveraging those.
So, uh, relatively speaking,
there's less investment needed in those,
which is probably why that picture is a bit skewed.
Um, but I mean, the, the roadmaps are at a,
it's a 10 year roadmap, so at a point in time, this is
what it looks like in terms of our governance and oversight.
Those roadmaps will be continually refreshed.
Um, and I would expect to be, uh, guided
by population health function as to where the priorities lie
and to respond to those
as they change. But yes, good question.
Do, do you think we have the ability to, um, identify,
do you think the health system has the ability to
identify people who need interventions
to prevent cardiovascular
and diabetes data enabled mechanisms to do that
and find them and help them?
I, I think absolutely.
If you look at our ability to leverage data, um,
and if I think about our response
to something like measles outbreak,
we're doing a whole range of things. Sorry,
My question's about chronic disease, like one of the,
in the working age population,
there is still a considerable number of Maori
and Pacific who, people who have, um, uh,
early mortality due to, um, cardiovascular disease.
And what I'm trying to explore is why, uh,
that isn't prioritized
because this is a 10 year plan for population health and,
and there's no action on that.
Seems like a problem for me.
Yeah, that's a fair, that's a fair comment.
I defer to my population health colleagues.
Um, I mean certainly leveraging data is a,
is a separate, a separate roadmap.
We'd expect to be looking at data across that as well.
Right. Maybe one
of your population health colleagues
will step forward in a minute.
In the meantime, I wanted to turn to the other area
that looked relatively light,
which was the primary care element 10.
Um, I mean, there's only two items
for investment over the 10 year period in primary care,
and one is support the sector to modernize primary
and community and enable access to virtual GP consult.
I mean, that seems pretty low ambition for the part
of the sector that the, um,
population interacts with the most.
Yeah, so, so the first, the first item there is, is
significant though will be my comment
that at the moment we have real fragmentation and,
and challenges around what of course is a, you know,
is a public private mix of the sector.
So what we need to do in that roadmap is work
with primary care to understand what the,
what the requirements are,
and then through there define
what the specific target areas are.
What we know today is that we have data that, uh,
is locked up and not able to flow between different primary
and community agencies.
Uh, we know that there's, um, some challenges around the,
the age of the technology, particularly in,
in general practice.
Um, so we, we need to work with those, with those, um,
organizations and work more broadly on
what a more detailed roadmap looks like.
Who wrote the plan? Uh,
so it was written by Health New Zealand.
Uh, we engaged with, um, we engaged with clinical networks.
We engaged with the executive regional directors
and their teams, um, to build up the,
to build up the roadmaps
and then underpinning it as a financial model that allows us
to flex and refine the plan as we go forward.
It was entirely written in house.
Uh, it was entirely written in house.
The one area that we got assistance
with was the financial modeling, so the financial modeling
that sits underneath the, um, the,
the financial profile was, was, um,
developed with the help of a third party
Getting close to the end.
Um, and the cost of delivering this plan, have you,
have you costed it yet?
Uh, well we, we know the, we, we know the cost.
I don't have the number in front of me.
Um, it was predominantly internal resource there.
You mean within the, within baselines?
Uh, yes. So the only cost that wasn't included in baseline
and was additional cost was the use of that,
um, that one third party.
And is this, so this whole, uh, are you saying
that the entire 10 years of work is now funded? Uh,
No, I think it's interpreted your question
as the plan itself.
Yes. I'm sorry. I think the question is the delivering
Oh, sorry, sorry. The
Cost, the cost of the PowerPoint slides.
It was otherwise very good news though. That's right.
No, so a apologies misinterpreted the question. So
Tell me about what you know about the cost
of the plan over the 10 year period.
Yeah, so we've modeled the cost
of the plan based on the roadmaps and the assumptions.
Uh, there is no, um, secured funding to deliver the plan.
What we do know is that, um, we need
to fund from a number of sources.
So we need to look at, uh, ways
to prioritize within our digital baseline.
We need to look at ways to prioritize within Health New
Zealand's baseline, and we need to look at
where additional funding is going to be needed.
We, we also need to look at
how we engage differently with the market.
So we know, and certainly over the last 12 months,
we've engaged differently with some of our, um,
technology providers
and looked at different ways of delivering capability.
Um, so all of those things need to be explored.
We will do that on an investment case
by investment case basis.
So every investment here needs to, um, be articulated
and then justified
and approved through a standard business case, which
Is just to clarify that in that case, uh, does
that mean you're not considering offering to one vendor, uh,
various different, um,
contracts which they might tie together
and offer you a better deal?
You look, you're not gonna look at that approach.
We will, we will look at, um, at any approach
that allows us to deliver the technology capability we need
and, and optimize the value,
but we'll do that through, um,
standard government procurement rules.
Um, in some areas we will want to, um, simplify
and standardize onto common platforms and other areas.
We want to enable innovation
and we want to enable the market
to respond in different ways.
Um, so all of those options are open and
Important to emphasize that this is a 10 year plan.
There is more detailed work to do
to define the precise scope of these, just like
for the health infrastructure plan as well.
As we do that more detailed work,
I think opportunities like the one you point to will come
to pass and we will also need to look at the phasing of that
to unlock those opportunities as well.
And that's the work that Darren
and the team are gonna be leading.
So I think, I think one of the other comments to add is
that we, in, in announcing the plan,
we also released on government tender service a signal
of market intent.
Uh, because I think one of the challenges we've got in the
absence of a plan, the market has had to be very reactive.
They're not quite sure what we're gonna buy
and when we're gonna buy it.
Um, and we tend to go with, uh, individual tenders, uh,
rather than it being part of a considered plan.
And that's one of the reasons why we've got such a
fragmented environment, uh,
and why we really struggle to,
to successfully deliver at scale.
So the intent of the plan, I think is also
to inform the market of, of direction of travel,
where we're heading and what's coming.
And I think that's really important.
I actually didn't want to convey the sense,
I was encouraging of the option of pack packaging up.
In fact, I hear from New Zealand firms quite often
that they feel locked out of, of procurement opportunities
and, um, uh, um, yeah, anyway, that's um,
that's that uh, can you give the committee an estimate
of the type of commitment annually required to
sustain sustain the plan?
So deliver the plan?
Yeah, so we've, we've, we've modeled that.
Um, we know that in the, if we look at proportionally,
so we know that in our current investment trajectory, uh,
we invest about 2.8% of, of our operational revenue, um,
international, um, benchmarks for that and,
and health sector investment are between four and eight.
Um, one of the questions is how do we,
how do we reprioritize and how do we secure that funding
because, you know, we don't have,
we don't have any, any headroom.
We have to remain sort of fiscally responsible.
So part of this depends on the, uh,
the pace at which we can move.
So we are, we are working with our internal process, um,
and we are working on, um, our go to market
and our investment case development to try
to get those investment cases as quickly as we can.
But we, we, we need,
we need more funding than we currently have.
That is for sure stop
Over here.
Excellent. What, what, what are the next
Set for the implementation Of this plan?
So we are, um, we are forming a center
for Digital Modernization of health.
So that, if you like, is the engine room
that drives delivery.
Uh, one of the challenges I think we have is that, um,
when you try to deliver plans like this, which are,
are pretty ambitious, um,
and when you try to deliver those at scale
and you try to do it out of your business
as usual structures, it is, it is really challenging.
So step one is to get the center set up.
Uh, step two is we're working on, um, our
standing up our delivery structures.
So unlike traditionally the way you do this, uh,
you would write an investment case
and then you would get investment case approval
and then you would stand up a structure to deliver that.
Uh, we are standing, our delivery structures up first,
so we have delivery portfolios, uh, with business
or clinical sponsorship and leadership
and they will both, they will develop the investment cases.
They will, they will make sure the roadmaps are robust
and then investment cases that are approved
or drop into that delivery structure.
Um, and then the third thing we are doing is, uh,
looking at our go to market.
So in terms of how do we engage with the market
around our priorities, uh, what are those priorities
and how, how do we do that in a, in a robust way?
In, in some cases we can leverage existing partnerships.
Um, so I talked about population
health would be a good example.
So we have a, we have a platform, uh,
and we have a, um, a, an industry partner
that we already work with.
There's new capability available on that platform
that would, um, provide real opportunity to, uh,
deliver value into population health.
That is a good example of where we think we can, uh,
there's a really solid investment case
and we can move fast in other areas.
We don't have the capability or we have multiple vendors
and we need to go to market through a contestable process
and decide how we, how we move forward.
One of the other really key next steps,
and it probably links to questions, is we're gonna need
to understand what's the capital expenditure here versus
operating expenditure.
As you are aware with the accounting rules, um, a lot
of digital investment has moved, uh, under the SAS rules
to opex.
And that will be really important to understand.
It's probably one of the things that we need to work on, uh,
with treasury as well.
I'm sure it's not unique to Health New Zealand this, uh,
challenge and in, if we are to unlock the benefits
of digital, then ensuring our funding models reflect the
importance that investment and, and how it flows into opex.
I think. Pretty cool. I think that's
A very good point.
Um, you've got one more start and then Asha has asap.
Um, what, where in the priorities does the National
Electronic ME medical record sit?
Um, and I appreciate you talking about leave leveraging, um,
existing, existing tools.
Um, bearing in mind I'm an MP from the south island
and of course we have Health one.
Um, what, where, where does a where does a national, um,
electronic or electronic medical record,
um, sit in the priorities?
It's, it's absolutely a priority.
Um, one of the challenges with it though is that, um,
in terms of where New Zealand is starting from
and in terms of what you're seeing internationally, some
of the traditional descriptions
of a an electronic medical record
or an electronic health record
or a patient administration system, they're really blurring.
So when you think about the power of data, uh, the ability
to apply AI for workflow, the clinical user experience, um,
the ability to provide channels out
to people in Hanau in terms
of engagement in their healthcare, um, what we need to do,
I think in terms of that domain
as a priority is we really need to think carefully about
what are the outcomes we're looking for,
and then actually engage the market to understand
what capability is there, uh, and where should we start.
Um, I talked about Leapfrog.
I think this is one of those areas where we
probably shouldn't assume
that we can just build on something we have, um,
I think we should carefully look at where we invest.
Um, you'll see elsewhere in the document we talk about an
independent data layer.
So I think the separation
of data from application is really, really important.
We're seeing impact of things like Heidi, which
Dr Bla Bramley mentioned, you know,
real impact on clinical user experience, cognitive load.
Um, these are the sorts of things I think we need
to look at carefully before we, uh,
before we make a decision about what we might procure.
I think it's, but it is a game changer.
But I think it's fair to say in the shorter term,
on interim we are leveraging, uh, technologies we have.
So we have a, a system that was built within
initially white Andar
and we've got other, um, hospital areas,
other districts that have nothing.
They're still on paper.
So we now actually, um, implementing that in those.
So for example, wado, Taranaki
and uh, health one that's got a lot of utility, uh,
because all of this will take, will take time.
So we don't wanna wait until we get some mega system.
We working to use what we have, leverage that, get
that into places that don't have anything in the meanwhile
so that we can just speed things along.
I think also to your point earlier, Dr.
Burrell, that the thing is with these platforms,
they are quite adaptable and there's quite a lot of utility
and once we've got them in place, you've got the licenses,
you can actually shift your population
health emphasis or add.
So it it, it does just 'cause not, unless it's not excluded
and, and actually in this kind of system, uh, the cost
of including is is relatively low.
So we have to be open to that.
So I think that this is a sort
of framework more than every specific, um,
but once we've got these platforms right,
then we can build on that quite, quite easily. Yeah,
I think that's a really good point
about building on what we've got.
So we take the product that, uh, that Lester mentioned.
We also have electronic prescribing.
We know we have, have many of our
hospitals still using paper.
We actually have a, a nationally selected tool
that is being used successfully.
We, we need to deploy that. We, we shouldn't wait.
Uh, we have a national maternity platform again being used
by both hospital and community midwifery.
We, we should be rolling that out.
So this is, this is a sort of an and and conversation.
We need to be looking at what the future would be
and then carefully think about
how we procure it while at the same time rolling out tools
that we've got that we should be scaling.
Think Dr. Campbell, um, health one that you mentioned,
which has been in the south island for quite some time,
has now been rolled out into the North island quite rapidly
and Tour Compass and it's going up to the North Islands
and there's four, um, p hos in the north island to join up
with the South Island P Hos to expand that,
uh, product quite rapidly.
That's actually happening right now
And it'll go national.
Excellent. Good. To Dr Up, what, um,
assurance can you give that key parts, like the electronic
health record will allow, um,
the product that's purchased
or built will allow Intraoperability
with other other tools?
It's, it's fundamental. Fundamental.
So I mean, if you, if you look in the,
if you look in the investment plan, we outline, um, in that
sort of data and interoperability domain,
we talk about the need to really enforce, um, data standards
about the need for interoperability.
Um, and part of our challenge in New Zealand is that
with the fragmentation we have, uh,
information just does not flow, um, the modern platforms
that we need to, um, implement, uh,
interoperability is just a given, just fundamental.
What can you say to vendors in, you know,
smaller tech startup vendors in New Zealand about the
opportunities they would have in that?
Well, the great, the great thing about these modern
platforms is that, um, all of the modern platforms
that I've, I've seen
and looked at recently, they,
they enabled this ecosystem of innovators.
Um, you know, I I, the days I've locked in platforms,
um, I, I think are gone.
We're, we're seeing real openness now around, um,
the ability to innovate on top of platforms.
And also of course leveraging AI means you've got
to have access to the data and
that's a really key part of the design.
Just to conclude this area, Mr.
Chair, the earlier question about, um, uh,
population health, if, um, Dr.
Chamberlain has anything to add on that
Yes. That, that work
streams referring to number of activities,
one of them is the shared data platform
that we are developing, which will allow us
to access general practice data, their,
their population registers
and uh, um, the coding of that as well as our own
to help us understand cardiovascular disease risk
assessment data.
Uh, we're also looking at developing my health record,
which is the patient portal, which will allow, um, patients
to take more activation of their own healthcare. Alright,
Very good. Thank you.
Okay. Mr. Chair cannot raise the points of order.
I just don't wanna disturb anyone, so
that's why I just wasted points of order.
Dr. Yes. I just want to be remind if you want that, um,
December scrutiny week, supposed to look back
for the past 12 months Yes.
Not looking into the future. So yes.
I just want, want to make sure, uh,
my colleague will will focus on a question, which is on
how last 12 months the,
the government agents have performed, rather than looking at
what they going to do in the next 12 months.
Yes, that is true, but it can have a bit of,
I try not to disturb anyone, so, yeah. Yeah.
Primary. Well, noting that
in the annual report, you mentioned health infrastructure,
um, tick.
Uh, so thank you for publishing this, um,
infrastructure plan,
but I have to say, it's much harder to, uh,
understand then the digital, um, plan.
So can we start with a high level description of, uh,
what is in scope for this plan?
What is out of scope
and the funding commitment required to deliver it?
Sorry,
Roger, do you wanna Start with that one?
So the, the plan was put together, um,
by the infrastructure group in the last, um, relation
of Health New Zealand and quite a comprehensive plan.
It was built around standardizing the build processes rather
than doing everything, uh, differently each time.
Uh, building possibles better.
Um, two fundamentals,
the acute services block standardization
around the Australian standards of the, um,
acute services blocks and also standard wharf.
That's, um, that was published
and we are working actively with that.
So MRA is, um, uh, progressing rapidly.
The, the, um, work started, um,
it started on acute services block.
We're also considering, um, the need
for wards as part of that.
So I think it's a, it's a moving plan
that having identified particular issue in the region, that,
um, it, it can't be moved
and developed in having, uh, approved
and going ahead with the acute services block.
Subsequently, reviews looked at, is that enough?
Do we need wards? Uh, Nelson,
likewise, another key part
of the health infrastructure plan, um,
is down there as, uh, Dr.
Margaret, uh, a couple weeks ago looking at that,
and that, again, proceeding, um, proceeding at pace,
uh, other areas we looked at is that while we're looking
to build an acute towards, um, some
of the needs have become more apparent.
So for Palmerston North, um, again, with the visit with Dr.
Margaret Wilshire, yes, I need to rebuild the,
um, acute services blocking patient units,
but the GDO, local GDO there, they said, actually,
I need more urgent action.
And the team have turned its attention to more urgent action
in terms of ICU, ed, CT
and s And
so having identified the large plan,
we are refining it in terms of clinical need,
and I think one of the things we've learned over the last
two years is that with the centralization
that we might have lost contact with some of the clinical
need locally.
And so the plan is being refined,
but there's still the speed of which it's being, um,
uh, moving at is considered as continuing
and it says moving at base,
Um, page eight, right?
It's got four stages,
but the text indicates this is a 10 year, 10 year plan.
This is all of the building hospitals investments.
So you've got 10 hospitals listed here
and multiple projects within that.
So that plan, is
that all work currently underway, business cases done
or approved, or
Business cases in development?
Uh, uh, the Auckland Refurbishments, um,
those plans are business cases for stage three going ahead.
Um, business cases going ahead. Uh, the, uh, said
Sorry, sorry to interrupt you.
You don't, I don't expect to list from memory
and we can questions about that,
but I guess just what I'm, uh, I'm trying to get is, uh,
Yes, the moving ahead was, um, doctor was, um, them
with PACE and the, um, the minister is very insistent,
um, and supportive of driving ahead with these initiatives
and, uh, the, the funding is flowing with those.
Is it fair to say that a decision has been taken
that if your capital project is not in this plan,
it's not happening for the next 10 years, barring some
new evidence about something being an urgent priority?
I think it's a, it was a plan that was set out
for 10 years was if we are starting to look at, um,
priorities within it that, um, so for example,
with the, um, the mo the portable wards have been built,
there's a hundred million dollars for portable wards,
urgent need for beds up pre-up ed.
So it is, it is a living document.
It has been varied, be capable of being varied,
but the intent, the overall intent of the re remediation,
particularly for the regional hospitals, um, is,
is still very much on track.
And how, um, the annual review documents not a gap
between the, um, capital funding
and the funding required to execute the plan.
Can you inform us what the applied funding required
to execute the plan is?
The current year, uh,
we are looking at our capital expenditure, um,
plan is $2.8 billion, um, that has been funded
by, uh, our own depreciation of, uh, $908 million.
Yeah, I, sorry, I'm just asking what's needed
for the plan, not what the current budget is.
Yeah,
I'll Let you answer this question and then
I'll have the camera there. There, there
is a, a, um, the funding layer,
the funding has been laid out
and requirements, um, for that, the immediate funding
said the $2 billion, the 980 million,
and going forward, um, those pathways are in place.
It's probably, Sorry, just, um,
So I was just gonna add that look at the total projects
that we've got underway, whether they be in
defined delivery, et cetera.
We've got $7.6 billion of projects underway,
and it's very similar to the digital plan.
As we get into the specific projects
and we look at the scope of those projects,
we may find opportunities
to do things more cost effectively.
And so I think if I could just explain the motivation
for the question infrastructure, it's a 10 year plan.
As members of parliament, we need
to take our responsibilities to cost our proposals about,
um, uh, about capital seriously as well.
Therefore, being open
and cost of a plan that you are hoping to extend
beyond political cycles is just something that helps, uh,
facilitate, um, good decision making.
So has this that you are able to tell me the digital plan
required 4.84 to 8%
of the health budget to be spent on digital.
So is there similar figure for the capital?
The there is not
because as I say, particularly
for the regional hospital redevelopments, if you think of,
um, if you think of, uh, Hawke's Bay, if you think of Ong
or if you think of Palmerston North,
those are very involved projects.
We are defining the clinical scope and
therefore the infrastructure
that is required needs a considerable amount of work.
Once we've done that work, we'll have a far better idea
of the cost of those, uh, projects.
I would also note that Frei is another great example.
There was an original scope that was put up,
it was too expensive to fund.
And so the team has done excellent work to re-scope
that a SB project,
bring it within the capital, uh, available.
And that's actually what the plan is intended to do as well.
You set out the priorities
and the focus areas so that we can ensure we get value
for money in the investments that we make.
Cameron Nelson Was another good example of that.
Um, uh, the, the original scope
that was put up was very, very expensive.
Um, working with clinicians there, it's been refined
and come in at, uh, seven $90 million current budget
and, um, moving it that's been approved
and moving ahead at a pace with that.
So it is being, it is being refined from concepts,
uh, to actually what is deliverable,
but the intent, certainly
with the regional hospitals, it's moving pace. Yeah.
Thank you. Um, I'm interested in, in talked about, uh,
these standards and,
and this building hospitals better, uh, program idea that,
that you run these buildings, um, standards is this
to get away from variations that see blowouts, um, across
as we have seen throughout our infrastructure
when it comes to building new stuff.
And how have the standards that have been developed,
who have they developed with, you said a New Zealand,
Australia standards
and how have they impacted on what you've done so far?
And I think you've talked about fun,
but you talk about what these standards have actually done
to bring everything into the line to make sure we know
that we're actually building it standard.
Yeah, ask David sound bit of infrastructure
To talk about.
So the standards are using Australia
and New Zealand, the national standards, so that we get
a rational base allows us to do two things.
One is to internationally index what's needed,
but also allows us to get some
standardization across the country.
Second thing we've done is actually applied those
into a modular base.
Mm-hmm. So that the module can then be refined to meet
a specific requirement.
So the requirement in, uh,
may be slightly different from the requirement in Nelson
or Hastings,
but the module that's small enough can be used to duplicate
that for sky scale and application.
And the third thing it allows us to do then is
to reduce the cost of delivery
because we don't have to go back
to preliminary design every time.
We can use the model and the standard designs
and then simply apply the additional design requirement
for the site specific piece.
So the seismic requirement may change,
but the fundamental functionality of the design doesn't.
Sure. And is the, are these modules,
which I take module just means a, a package of plans
and specifications that you need to be built to, uh,
are these modules accessible to the market?
Say so someone who might want to, um, take an opportunity
to develop a, a piece of, um, medical infrastructure
or healthcare infrastructure that could actually be, uh,
used in the future by Health New Zealand or come to process.
Are these modules available outside of Health New Zealand
At the moment? There's
standards that the standards are available
internationally, and so anyone can take the standards.
We've developed them with our clinicians
to meet our requirements specifically
around each of the areas.
And that's then formulated to set the basis for
the procurement model, which is then costed through.
Sure. Vicky,
Thank you.
Any questions? Primary questions? Yes. Okay.
Um, do you have no more SAP Simon? I
Have one more sir.
Why does the plan have more specificity on the number
of car parks than the number of beds?
I'm not sure that it does.
It does because it has a list of car parks with the number
of parks that will be in them
and then all these hospitals were building.
But no list of the number of beds.
My, most of the plans I've seen specify the number
of beds, the ed, the number of beds, um, in a medical ward,
number of beds, and ICU, et cetera as part of the criteria.
So, um, we can provide you
with more data if you want more data.
Um, supplementary the carpark one is
probably the most simplistic
because it's square meters divided through when
for a flat piece of laptop.
Okay. Great to have that information
Supplementary. Cameron,
Is it, is it the case that when building, um,
infrastructure in New Zealand, especially buildings
for humans to occupy, they're a set, uh,
building code standard that define
how many car parks you need
and district plans that also do that?
There are, um, car park requirements that vary slightly
by, um, jurisdiction,
but predominantly our car parking requirements are driven
by our own requirements for meeting the needs,
or we know re had, um,
400 odd car parks with the growth.
We know we need more. So we're putting in a facility
for 500 odd, um, that ties in with the gross requirements
and the known utilization and demand.
It's not a statutory requirement by the Northland Council.
Well done. Dr. Vel comes down. Alright.
Primary council. Thank you
Mr. Chair. My
question, a very, very quick question.
I just wanna get an update on how the, um, the,
the Auckland Hospital upgrade going.
Yeah, Yeah.
Um, third one is finished came in under budget, uh,
that was the first BD uh, two's underway
and third three system in approved.
There've been very successful projects
and there's a lot of learnings, um, are very, very, um,
very talented team that thought, um, with the, um,
consultants and the engineers successfully delivered that
and remediated a 1960s.
Um, building RB two is underway.
RB three has just been approved
and we've got very good knowledge now
of the engineering required
and the costings that model's been rolled out apart across
other parts of New Zealand to,
and that knowledge will also extending depart.
We're doing it at urgent remediation.
So my question is, is the hot water pipe being changed now
And is that that, uh, it's part of the, um, a, uh, part
of Auckland and it's also been looked at in terms of
to the copper pipes? Yes. Mm-hmm.
There are three stages for
that replacement in Auckland were complete stage one
and just a month ago we signed off the second stage of
that plan.
The point Roger makes, uh, it's one
of the important benefits of Health New Zealand
and given the success we've had in
that third program in Auckland,
you look at the other upgrades
that we've got to do nationally.
We had a question earlier in the day about learnings.
I think it was with regards to ed,
we can now flow those learnings into other parts
of the country, palms to north, for example.
We certainly aware of the copper, copper pipes now
and the need for maintenance and time replacement of that.
And that's been looked at with, uh, copper pipes and
Yeah. So is there
any, uh, temporary work being done
to address those issues in the past 12 months?
There's t there's various amounts
of temporary work being done.
The key one that we're working on at the moment
is Palmerston North.
Um, so $180 million been approved for Palmerston North
and remediation projects for, uh,
electrical in a particular fire.
Um, where that building's been left for a long time
and urgent work, you know, underway
with three packages of work.
So $180 million.
So, so how about Auckland City Hospital?
That's continuing. That work's been, uh, underway as, um,
Ben said it's been approved
and third, three, third stage of it has been and designed.
Now.
Any more questions from members?
Are we moving on to the general section?
Uh, there, there is always room
for a general section out of this.
Does, do any members have a general question, current event
or other issue they want to raise or ask?
Health New Zealand?
Yes, this chair I
Do pa the primary questions.
Got. Got it.
Um, given, given this is an annual annual review, um,
has the delivery of healthcare services in New Zealand
improved since your last hit under committee?
Yes. Do you want to elaborate?
Yes, yes is good? Yes is good.
It is good. Alright. Across multiple dimensions, but, uh,
I'd say, um, multiple domains we are seeing improvements,
uh, access to services and the number of people being seen
and being able to treat is absolutely rising.
Uh, primary care has had significant investment going in
and we're seeing a number of our indicators which, uh,
relate to health outcomes are starting to lift.
I'm sorry about that. Hasn't worked all day.
Merry Christmas,
Uh, Exception. But
we absolutely have ongoing challenges
and a lot of work to do as indicated by the lists, uh,
significant waiting lists that we have in wasting times.
And also, uh, the need
to keep building up our staff and culture
And improvements are, are, are good and welcome,
but they're know in there what we want to achieve.
So a lot of work to do, uh, to still get there.
I think what's probably the most, um, easing out of
what we see is the recent increases in productivity, uh,
because that's really important for us
to be able to influence access
Dr. Cameron more. So. No, that's
Good. Okay.
Thank you Dr. Trump. Thank you Mr. Chair.
I think I asked a similar question last year,
but uh, I just wanna follow up.
Um, after 12 months I still receive a lot
of complaint from the hospital staff that there's a lot
of medicine and device wastage in the hospital
and we haven't addressed that.
So what is our approach
Medicine? I
give you a little bit example.
A lot of, um, from what I heard,
a lot sugar testing machine are being,
device are being chuck in the bin un open, but just
because they expire, um, how can we address the issues
to minimize the waste loss spending in the hospital?
Uh, we might get Dr. Sullivan to come up and answer that,
but we do, um, in terms of wastage,
you could view that as, um, under use, uh,
or overuse.
Or misuse, right.
In terms of a classification, uh, what we'd say is that, um,
for some things, uh, we know
that there is some overuse of that.
So we try to build in systems that might be able
to give feedback loops that say, for example,
you might not need that blood test, uh,
or that might not be indicated
or we remind you that actually you've had that test done
recently and you don't need to do it.
Uh, again, you can also put in additional layers, uh,
if you think something requires a higher level of, you know,
scrutiny, that that could happen.
And we are also using things like our clinical networks
where we are saying to them, for example,
and radiology has just come
and presented to the ELT, what are some of those
procedures now that might not be clinically indicated
that we do, for example, x-rays for, there's a series
of things actually that may not be of use.
And then we are trying to put in guidance around how
to stop doing that
or to minimize that in terms of clinical practice.
And then I think you're getting to very much know right on
the shop floor is their, their wastage.
Well, I mean that's partly a culture for us to work
with our teams and staff, uh,
because every resource that we have matters
and if we misusing it,
then we can't use it for patient care. Yes.
Obviously this is on the management level.
How about on the recycle level?
How can Yeah, I was gonna say we do,
we do have a sustainability program.
Um, and I don't have the details at hand,
but, uh, with clinical leaders as part of that, um,
interestingly, actually often led by anesthetic, um,
specialists, um, because they see a lot
of wasted through the theaters.
That's right. Um, the PACS come in, you know,
they're only partially used, you know, the, you know,
the syringes can be recycled as plastic and so forth.
So there's quite a lot of, um, single initiatives going on,
but it is one of the opportunities within the kind
of construct of Health New Zealand
whereby can we scale that stuff.
So there is a, we do have a sustainability function
with clinical engagement,
but I don't have the exact details on hand.
Um, but as exactly as you were saying
that people are seeing the opportunity to really,
to rethink the, the, you know, the,
the, the way we use things.
Um, so I can bring more inflation back.
Alright. Hopefully we, um, we're not asking
that question next year, so Yeah.
Or have a better answer. I thank you everybody. Dr.
Bramley. Professor Levy, thank you Connelley.
Dr. Sullivan, uh, everybody else.
Thank you Bevin, all the officials
and Clarks mps, we are done for scrutiny week.
Your review 25. Thank you. Thank you very
Much. Having us
Want two.